* book i * 



chapter 2 . the shadow of the past 



the talk did not die down in nine or even ninety -nine days. the second 
disappearance of mr. bilbo baggins was discussed in hobbiton, and indeed all 
over the shire, for a year and a day, and was remembered much longer than 
that. it became a fireside -story for young hobbits; and eventually mad 
baggins, who used to vanish with a bang and a flash and reappear with bags 
of jewels and gold, became a favourite character of legend and lived on long 
after all the true events were forgotten. 

but in the meantime, the general opinion in the neighbourhood was that 
bilbo, who had always been rather cracked, had at last gone quite mad, and 
had run off into the blue. there he had undoubtedly fallen into a pool or a 
river and come to a tragic, but hardly an untimely, end. the blame was 
mostly laid on gandalf. 

'if only that dratted wizard will leave young frodo alone, perhaps 
he'll settle down and grow some hobbit-sense,' they said. and to all 
appearance the wizard did leave frodo alone, and he did settle down, but the 
growth of hobbit-sense was not very noticeable. indeed, he at once began to 
carry on bilbo's reputation for oddity. he refused to go into mourning; and 
the next year he gave a party in honour of bilbo's hundred-and-twelfth 
birthday, which he called hundred-weight feast. but that was short of the 
mark, for twenty guests were invited and there were several meals at which 
it snowed food and rained drink, as hobbits say. 

some people were rather shocked; but frodo kept up the custom of giving 
bilbo's birthday party year after year until they got used to it. he said 
that he did not think bilbo was dead. when they asked: 'where is he then?' 
he shrugged his shoulders. 

he lived alone, as bilbo had done; but he had a good many friends, 
especially among the younger hobbits (mostly descendants of the old took) 
who had as children been fond of bilbo and often in and out of bag end. 
folco boffin and fredegar bolger were two of these; but his closest friends 
were peregrin took (usually called pippin), and merry brandybuck (his real 
name was meriadoc, but that was seldom remembered). frodo went tramping 
all 

over the shire with them; but more often he wandered by himself, and to the 
amazement of sensible folk he was sometimes seen far from home walking in 




the hills and woods under the starlight. merry and pippin suspected that he 
visited the elves at times, as bilbo had done. 

as time went on, people began to notice that frodo also showed signs of 
good ’preservation': outwardly he retained the appearance of a robust and 
energetic hobbit just out of his tweens. ’some folk have all the luck,’ they 
said; but it was not until frodo approached the usually more sober age of 
fifty that they began to think it queer. 

frodo himself, after the first shock, found that being his own master 
and the mr. baggins of bag end was rather pleasant. for some years he was 
quite happy and did not worry much about the future. but half unknown to 
himself the regret that he had not gone with bilbo was steadily growing. he 
found himself wondering at times, especially in the autumn, about the wild 
lands, and strange visions of mountains that he had never seen came into his 
dreams. he began to say to himself: 'perhaps i shall cross the river myself 
one day.' to which the other half of his mind always replied: 'not yet.' 

so it went on, until his forties were running out, and his fiftieth 
birthday was drawing near: fifty was a number that he felt was somehow 
significant (or ominous); it was at any rate at that age that adventure had 
suddenly befallen bilbo. frodo began to feel restless, and the old paths 
seemed too well-trodden. he looked at maps, and wondered what lay beyond 
their edges: maps made in the shire showed mostly white spaces beyond its 
borders. he took to wandering further afield and more often by himself; and 
merry and his other friends watched him anxiously. often he was seen walking 
and talking with the strange wayfarers that began at this time to appear in 
the shire. 

there were rumours of strange things happening in the world outside; 
and as gandalf had not at that time appeared or sent any message for several 
years, frodo gathered all the news he could. elves, who seldom walked in the 
shire, could now be seen passing westward through the woods in the evening, 
passing and not returning; but they were leaving middle-earth and were no 
longer concerned with its troubles. there were, however, dwarves on the road 
in unusual numbers. the ancient east -west road ran through the shire to its 
end at the grey havens, and dwarves had always used it on their way to their 
mines in the blue mountains. they were the hobbits' chief source of news 
from distant parts - if they wanted any: as a rule dwarves said little and 
hobbits asked no more. but now frodo often met strange dwarves of far 
countries, seeking refuge in the west. they were troubled, and some spoke in 




whispers of the enemy and of the land of mordor. 

that name the hobbits only knew in legends of the dark past, like a 
shadow in the background of their memories; but it was ominous and 
disquieting. it seemed that the evil power in mirkwood had been driven out 
by the white council only to reappear in greater strength in the old 
strongholds of mordor. the dark tower had been rebuilt, it was said. from 
there the power was spreading far and wide, and away far east and south 
there were wars and growing fear. ores were multiplying again in the 
mountains. trolls were abroad, no longer dull-witted, but cunning and armed 
with dreadful weapons. and there were murmured hints of creatures more 
terrible than all these, but they had no name. 

little of all this, of course, reached the ears of ordinary hobbits. 

but even the deafest and most stay-at-home began to hear queer tales; and 
those whose business took them to the borders saw strange things. the 
conversation in the green dragon at bywater, one evening in the spring of 
frodo's fiftieth year, showed that even in the comfortable heart of the 
shire rumours had been heard, though most hobbits still laughed at them. 

sam gamgee was sitting in one corner near the fire, and opposite him 
was ted sandyman, the miller's son; and there were various other rustic 
hobbits listening to their talk. 

’queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,' said sam. 

'ah,' said ted, 'you do, if you listen. but i can hear fireside-tales 
and children's stories at home, if i want to.' 

'no doubt you can,' retorted sam, 'and i daresay there's more truth in 
some of them than you reckon. who invented the stories anyway? take 
dragons 
now.' 

'no thank 'ee,' said ted, 'i won't. i heard tell of them when i was a 
youngster, but there's no call to believe in them now. there's only one 
dragon in by water, and that's green,' he said, getting a general laugh. 

'all right,' said sam, laughing with the rest. 'but what about these 
tree-men, these giants, as you might call them? they do say that one bigger 
than a tree was seen up away beyond the north moors not long back.' 

'who's theyt 

'my cousin hal for one. he works for mr. boffin at overhill and goes up 
to the northfarthing for the hunting. he saw one.' 

'says he did, perhaps. your hal's always saying he's seen things; and 




maybe he sees things that ain't there.' 

'but this one was as big as an elm tree, and walking - walking seven 
yards to a stride, if it was an inch.' 

'then i bet it wasn't an inch. what he saw was an elm tree, as like as 
not.' 

'but this one was walking, i tell you; and there ain't no elm tree on 
the north moors.' 

'then hal can't have seen one,' said ted. there was some laughing and 
clapping: the audience seemed to think that ted had scored a point. 

'all the same,' said sam, 'you can't deny that others besides our 
halfast have seen queer folk crossing the shire - crossing it, mind you: 
there are more that are turned back at the borders. the bounders have never 
been so busy before. 

'and i've heard tell that elves are moving west. they do say they are 
going to the harbours, out away beyond the white towers.' sam waved his 
arm 

vaguely: neither he nor any of them knew how far it was to the sea, past the 
old towers beyond the western borders of the shire. but it was an old 
tradition that away over there stood the grey havens, from which at times 
elven-ships set sail, never to return. 

'they are sailing, sailing, sailing over the sea, they are going into 
the west and leaving us,' said sam, half chanting the words, shaking his 
head sadly and solemnly. but ted laughed. 

'well, that isn't anything new, if you believe the old tales. and i 
don't see what it matters to me or you. let them sail! but i warrant you 
haven't seen them doing it; nor any one else in the shire.' 

'well i don't know,' said sam thoughtfully. he believed he had once 
seen an elf in the woods, and still hoped to see more one day. of all the 
legends that he had heard in his early years such fragments of tales and 
half-remembered stories about the elves as the hobbits knew, had always 
moved him most deeply. 'there are some, even in these parts, as know the 
fair folk and get news of them,' he said. 'there's mr. baggins now, that i 
work for. he told me that they were sailing and he knows a bit about elves. 
and old mr. bilbo knew more: many's the talk i had with him when i was a 
little lad.' 

'oh, they're both cracked,' said ted. 'leastways old bilbo was cracked, 
and frodo's cracking. if that's where you get your news from, you'll never 




want for moonshine. well, friends, i'm off home. your good health!' he 
drained his mug and went out noisily. 

sam sat silent and said no more. he had a good deal to think about. for 
one thing, there was a lot to do up in the bag end garden, and he would have 
a busy day tomorrow, if the weather cleared. the grass was growing fast. but 
sam had more on his mind than gardening. after a while he sighed, and got up 
and went out. 

it was early april and the sky was now clearing after heavy rain. the 
sun was down, and a cool pale evening was quietly fading into night. he 
walked home under the early stars through hobbiton and up the hill, 
whistling softly and thoughtfully. 

it was just at this time that gandalf reappeared after his long 
absence. for three years after the party he had been away. then he paid 
frodo a brief visit, and after taking a good look at him he went off again. 
during the next year or two he had turned up fairly often, coming 
unexpectedly after dusk, and going off without warning before sunrise. he 
would not discuss his own business and journeys, and seemed chiefly 
interested in small news about frodo's health and doings. 

then suddenly his visits had ceased. it was over nine years since frodo 
had seen or heard of him, and he had begun to think that the wizard would 
never return and had given up all interest in hobbits. but that evening, as 
sam was walking home and twilight was fading, there came the once familiar 
tap on the study window. 

frodo welcomed his old friend with surprise and great delight. they 
looked hard at one another. 

’ah well eh?' said gandalf. 'you look the same as ever, frodo!' 

'so do you,' frodo replied; but secretly he thought that gandalf looked 
older and more careworn. he pressed him for news of himself and of the wide 
world, and soon they were deep in talk, and they stayed up far into the 
night. 

next morning after a late breakfast, the wizard was sitting with frodo 
by the open window of the study. a bright fire was on the hearth, but the 
sun was warm, and the wind was in the south. everything looked fresh, and 
the new green of spring was shimmering in the fields and on the tips of the 
trees' fingers. 

gandalf was thinking of a spring, nearly eighty years before, when 
bilbo had run out of bag end without a handkerchief. his hair was perhaps 




whiter than it had been then, and his beard and eyebrows were perhaps 
longer, and his face more lined with care and wisdom; but his eyes were as 
bright as ever, and he smoked and blew smoke -rings with the same vigour and 
delight. 

he was smoking now in silence, for frodo was sitting still, deep in 
thought. even in the light of morning he felt the dark shadow of the tidings 
that gandalf had brought. at last he broke the silence. 

'last night you began to tell me strange things about my ring, 

gandalf,' he said. 'and then you stopped, because you said that such matters 
were best left until daylight. don't you think you had better finish now? 

you say the ring is dangerous, far more dangerous than i guess. in what 
way?' 

'in many ways,' answered the wizard. it is far more powerful than i 
ever dared to think at first, so powerful that in the end it would utterly 
overcome anyone of mortal race who possessed it. it would possess him. 

'in eregion long ago many elven-rings were made, magic rings as you 
call them, and they were, of course, of various kinds: some more potent and 
some less. the lesser rings were only essays in the craft before it was 
full-grown, and to the elven-smiths they were but trifles - yet still to my 
mind dangerous for mortals. but the great rings, the rings of power, they 
were perilous. 

'a mortal, frodo, who keeps one of the great rings, does not die, but 
he does not grow or obtain more life, he merely continues, until at last 
every minute is a weariness. and if he often uses the ring to make himself 
invisible, he fades: he becomes in the end invisible permanently, and walks 
in the twilight under the eye of the dark power that rules the rings. yes, 
sooner or later - later, if he is strong or well-meaning to begin with, but 
neither strength nor good purpose will last - sooner or later the dark power 
will devour him.' 

'how terrifying!' said frodo. there was another long silence. the sound 
of sam gamgee cutting the lawn came in from the garden. 

'how long have you known this?' asked frodo at length. 'and how much 
did bilbo know?' 

'bilbo knew no more than he told you, i am sure,' said gandalf. 'he 
would certainly never have passed on to you anything that he thought would 
be a danger, even though i promised to look after you. he thought the ring 
was very beautiful, and very useful at need; and if anything was wrong or 




queer, it was himself. he said that it was "growing on his mind", and he was 
always worrying about it; but he did not suspect that the ring itself was to 
blame. though he had found out that the thing needed looking after; it did 
not seem always of the same size or weight; it shrank or expanded in an odd 
way, and might suddenly slip off a finger where it had been tight.' 

'yes, he warned me of that in his last letter,' said frodo, 'so i have 
always kept it on its chain.' 

'very wise,' said gandalf. 'but as for his long life, bilbo never 
connected it with the ring at all. he took all the credit for that to 
himself, and he was very proud of it. though he was getting restless and 
uneasy. thin and stretched he said. a sign that the ring was getting 
control.' 

'how long have you known all this?' asked frodo again. 

'known?' said gandalf. 'i have known much that only the wise know, 
frodo. but if you mean "known about this ring", well, i still do not know, 
one might say. there is a last test to make. but i no longer doubt my guess. 

'when did i first begin to guess?' he mused, searching back in memory. 

'let me see - it was in the year that the white council drove the dark power 
from mirkwood, just before the battle of five armies, that bilbo found his 
ring. a shadow fell on my heart then, though i did not know yet what i 
feared. i wondered often how gollum came by a great ring, as plainly it was 
- that at least was clear from the first. then i heard bilbo's strange story 
of how he had "won" it, and i could not believe it. when i at last got the 
truth out of him, i saw at once that he had been trying to put his claim to 
the ring beyond doubt. much like gollum with his "birthday present". the 
lies were too much alike for my comfort. clearly the ring had an unwholesome 
power that set to work on its keeper at once. that was the first real 
warning i had that all was not well. i told bilbo often that such rings were 
better left unused; but he resented it, and soon got angry. there was little 
else that i could do. i could not take it from him without doing greater 
harm; and i had no right to do so anyway. i could only watch and wait. i 
might perhaps have consulted saruman the white, but something always held 
me 
back.' 

'who is he?' asked frodo. i have never heard of him before.' 

'maybe not,' answered gandalf. 'hobbits are, or were, no concern of 
his. yet he is great among the wise. he is the chief of my order and the 




head of the council. his knowledge is deep, but his pride has grown with it, 
and he takes ill any meddling. the lore of the elven-rings, great and small, 
is his province. he has long studied it, seeking the lost secrets of their 
making; but when the rings were debated in the council, all that he would 
reveal to us of his ring-lore told against my fears. so my doubt slept - but 
uneasily. still i watched and i waited. 

'and all seemed well with bilbo. and the years passed. yes, they 
passed, and they seemed not to touch him. he showed no signs of age. the 
shadow fell on me again. but i said to myself: "after all he comes of a 
long-lived family on his mother's side. there is time yet. wait!" 

'and i waited. until that night when he left this house. he said and 
did things then that filled me with a fear that no words of saruman could 
allay. i knew at last that something dark and deadly was at work. and i have 
spent most of the years since then in finding out the truth of it.' 

'there wasn't any permanent harm done, was there?' asked frodo 
anxiously. 'he would get all right in time, wouldn't he? be able to rest in 
peace, i mean?' 

'he felt better at once,' said gandalf. 'but there is only one power in 
this world that knows all about the rings and their effects; and as far as i 
know there is no power in the world that knows all about hobbits. among the 
wise i am the only one that goes in for hobbit-lore: an obscure branch of 
knowledge, but full of surprises. soft as butter they can be, and yet 
sometimes as tough as old tree-roots. i think it likely that some would 
resist the rings far longer than most of the wise would believe. i don't 
think you need worry about bilbo. 

'of course, he possessed the ring for many years, and used it, so it 
might take a long while for the influence to wear off - before it was safe 
for him to see it again, for instance. otherwise, he might live on for 
years, quite happily: just stop as he was when he parted with it. for he 
gave it up in the end of his own accord: an important point. no, i was not 
troubled about dear bilbo any more, once he had let the thing go. it is for 
you that i feel responsible. 

'ever since bilbo left i have been deeply concerned about you, and 
about all these charming, absurd, helpless hobbits. it would be a grievous 
blow to the world, if the dark power overcame the shire; if all your kind, 
jolly, stupid bolgers, hornblowers, boffins, bracegirdles, and the rest, not 
to mention the ridiculous bagginses, became enslaved.' 




frodo shuddered. 'but why should we be?' he asked. 'and why should he 
want such slaves?' 

'to tell you the truth,' replied gandalf, 'i believe that hitherto - 
hitherto, mark you - he has entirely overlooked the existence of hobbits. 

you should be thankful. but your safety has passed. he does not need you - 
he has many more useful servants - but he won't forget you again. and 
hobbits as miserable slaves would please him far more than hobbits happy and 
free. there is such a thing as malice and revenge.' 

'revenge?' said frodo. 'revenge for what? i still don't understand what 
all this has to do with bilbo and myself, and our ring.' 

'it has everything to do with it,' said gandalf. 'you do not know the 
real peril yet; but you shall. i was not sure of it myself when i was last 
here; but the time has come to speak. give me the ring for a moment.' 

frodo took it from his breeches-pocket, where it was clasped to a chain 
that hung from his belt. he unfastened it and handed it slowly to the 
wizard. it felt suddenly very heavy, as if either it or frodo himself was in 
some way reluctant for gandalf to touch it. 

gandalf held it up. it looked to be made of pure and solid gold. 'can 
you see any markings on it?' he asked. 

'no,' said frodo. 'there are none. it is quite plain, and it never 
shows a scratch or sign of wear.' 

'well then, look!' to frodo's astonishment and distress the wizard 
threw it suddenly into the middle of a glowing corner of the fire. frodo 
gave a cry and groped for the tongs; but gandalf held him back. 

'wait!' he said in a commanding voice, giving frodo a quick look from 
under his bristling brows. 

no apparent change came over the ring. after a while gandalf got up, 
closed the shutters outside the window, and drew the curtains. the room 
became dark and silent, though the clack of sam's shears, now nearer to the 
windows, could still be heard faintly from the garden. for a moment the 
wizard stood looking at the fire; then he stooped and removed the ring to 
the hearth with the tongs, and at once picked it up. frodo gasped. 

it is quite cool,' said gandalf. 'take it!' frodo received it on his 
shrinking palm: it seemed to have become thicker and heavier than ever. 

'hold it up!' said gandalf. 'and look closely!' 

as frodo did so, he now saw fine lines, finer than the finest 
pen-strokes, running along the ring, outside and inside: lines of fire that 




seemed to form the letters of a flowing script. they shone piercingly 
bright, and yet remote, as if out of a great depth. 

i cannot read the fiery letters,' said frodo in a quavering voice. 

'no,' said gandalf, 'but i can. the letters are elvish, of an ancient 
mode, but the language is that of mordor, which i will not utter here. but 
this in the common tongue is what is said, close enough: 

one ring to rule them all, one ring to find them, 

one ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them. 

it is only two lines of a verse long known in elven-lore: 

three rings for the elven-kings under the sky, 

seven for the dwarf-lords in their halls of stone, 

nine for mortal men doomed to die, 

one for the dark lord on his dark throne 
in the land of mordor where the shadows lie. 

one ring to rule them all. one ring to find them, 

one ring to bring them all and in the darkness bind them 
in the land of mordor where the shadows lie. ' 

he paused, and then said slowly in a deep voice: 'this is the 
master -ring, the one ring to rule them all. this is the one ring that he 
lost many ages ago, to the great weakening of his power. he greatly desires 
it - but he must not get it.' 

frodo sat silent and motionless. fear seemed to stretch out a vast 
hand, like a dark cloud rising in the east and looming up to engulf him. 
'this ring!' he stammered. 'how, how on earth did it come to me?' 

'ah!' said gandalf. 'that is a very long story. the beginnings lie back 
in the black years, which only the lore-masters now remember. if i were to 
tell you all that tale, we should still be sitting here when spring had 
passed into winter. 

'but last night i told you of sauron the great, the dark lord. the 
rumours that you have heard are true: he has indeed arisen again and left 
his hold in mirkwood and returned to his ancient fastness in the dark tower 
of mordor. that name even you hobbits have heard of, like a shadow on the 
borders of old stories. always after a defeat and a respite, the shadow 
takes another shape and grows again.' 

'i wish it need not have happened in my time,' said frodo. 

'so do i,' said gandalf, 'and so do all who live to see such times. but 




that is not for them to decide. all we have to decide is what to do with the 
time that is given, us. and already, frodo, our time is beginning to look 
black. the enemy is fast becoming very strong. his plans are far from ripe, 

i think, but they are ripening. we shall be hard put to it. we should be 
very hard put to it, even if it were not for this dreadful chance. 

'the enemy still lacks one thing to give him strength and knowledge to 
beat down all resistance, break the last defences, and cover all the lands 
in a second darkness. he lacks the one ring. 

'the three, fairest of all, the elf-lords hid from him, and his hand 
never touched them or sullied them. seven the dwarf-kings possessed, but 
three he has recovered, and the others the dragons have consumed. nine he 
gave to mortal men, proud and great, and so ensnared them. long ago they 
fell under the dominion of the one, and they became ringwraiths, shadows 
under his great shadow, his most terrible servants. long ago. it is many a 
year since the nine walked abroad. yet who knows? as the shadow grows 
once 

more, they too may walk again. but come! we will not speak of such things 
even in the morning of the shire. 

'so it is now: the nine he has gathered to himself; the seven also, or 
else they are destroyed. the three are hidden still. but that no longer 
troubles him. he only needs the one; for he made that ring himself, it is 
his, and he let a great part of his own former power pass into it, so that 
he could rule all the others. if he recovers it, then he will command them 
all again, wherever they be, even the three, and all that has been wrought 
with them will be laid bare, and he will be stronger than ever. 

'and this is the dreadful chance, frodo. he believed that the one had 
perished; that the elves had destroyed it, as should have been done. but he 
knows now that it has not perished, that it has been found. so he is seeking 
it, seeking it, and all his thought is bent on it. it is his great hope and 
our great fear.' 

'why, why wasn't it destroyed?' cried frodo. 'and how did the enemy 
ever come to lose it, if he was so strong, and it was so precious to him?' 

he clutched the ring in his hand, as if he saw already dark fingers 
stretching out to seize it. 

'it was taken from him,' said gandalf. 'the strength of the elves to 
resist him was greater long ago; and not all men were estranged from them. 
the men of westernesse came to their aid. that is a chapter of ancient 




history which it might be good to recall; for there was sorrow then too, and 
gathering dark, but great valour, and great deeds that were not wholly vain. 

one day, perhaps, i will tell you all the tale, or you shall hear it told in 
full by one who knows it best. 

'but for the moment, since most of all you need to know how this thing 
came to you, and that will be tale enough, this is all that i will say. it 
was gil-galad, elven-king and elendil of westernesse who overthrew sauron, 
though they themselves perished in the deed; and isildur elendil's son cut 
the ring from sauron's hand and took it for his own. then sauron was 
vanquished and his spirit fled and was hidden for long years, until his 
shadow took shape again in mirkwood. 

'but the ring was lost. it fell into the great river, anduin, and 
vanished. for isildur was marching north along the east banks of the river, 
and near the gladden fields he was waylaid by the ores of the mountains, and 
almost all his folk were slain. he leaped into the waters, but the ring 
slipped from his finger as he swam, and then the ores saw him and killed him 
with arrows.' 

gandalf paused. 'and there in the dark pools amid the gladden fields,' 
he said, 'the ring passed out of knowledge and legend; and even so much of 
its history is known now only to a few, and the council of the wise could 
discover no more. but at last i can carry on the story, i think. 

'fong after, but still very long ago, there lived by the banks of the 
great river on the edge of wilderland a clever -handed and quiet-footed 
little people. i guess they were of hobbit -kind; akin to the fathers of the 
fathers of the stoors, for they loved the river, and often swam in it, or 
made little boats of reeds. there was among them a family of high repute, 
for it was large and wealthier than most, and it was ruled by a grandmother 
of the folk, stern and wise in old lore, such as they had. the most 
inquisitive and curious-minded of that family was called smjagol. he was 
interested in roots and beginnings; he dived into deep pools; he burrowed 
under trees and growing plants; he tunnelled into green mounds; and he 
ceased to look up at the hill-tops, or the leaves on trees, or the flowers 
opening in the air: his head and his eyes were downward. 

'he had a friend called djagol, of similar sort, sharper -eyed but not 
so quick and strong. on a time they took a boat and went down to the gladden 
fields, where there were great beds of iris and flowering reeds. there 
smjagol got out and went nosing about the banks but deal sat in the boat and 




fished. suddenly a great fish took his hook, and before he knew where he 
was, he was dragged out and down into the water, to the bottom. then he let 
go of his line, for he thought he saw something shining in the river-bed; 
and holding his breath he grabbed at it. 

'then up he came spluttering, with weeds in his hair and a handful of 
mud; and he swam to the bank. and behold! when he washed the mud away, 
there 

in his hand lay a beautiful golden ring; and it shone and glittered in the 
sun, so that his heart was glad. but smjagol had been watching him from 
behind a tree, and as deal gloated over the ring, smjagol came softly up 
behind. 

"'give us that, deal, my love," said smjagol, over his friend's 
shoulder. 

'"why?" said deal. 

' "because it's my birthday, my love, and i wants it," said smjagol. 

'"i don't care," said deal. "i have given you a present already, more 
than i could afford. i found this, and i'm going to keep it." 

' "oh, are you indeed, my love," said smjagol; and he caught deal by 
the throat and strangled him, because the gold looked so bright and 
beautiful. then he put the ring on his finger. 

'no one ever found out what had become of deal; he was murdered far 
from home, and his body was cunningly hidden. but smjagol returned alone; 
and he found that none of his family could see him, when he was wearing the 
ring. he was very pleased with his discovery and he concealed it; and he 
used it to find out secrets, and he put his knowledge to crooked and 
malicious uses. he became sharp-eyed and keen-eared for all that was 
hurtful. the ring had given him power according to his stature. it is not to 
be wondered at that he became very unpopular and was shunned (when 
visible) 

by all his relations. they kicked him, and he bit their feet. he took to 
thieving, and going about muttering to himself, and gurgling in his throat. 

so they called him gollum, and cursed him, and told him to go far away; and 
his grandmother, desiring peace, expelled him from the family and turned him 
out of her hole. 

'he wandered in loneliness, weeping a little for the hardness of the 
world, and he journeyed up the river, till he came to a stream that flowed 
down from the mountains, and he went that way. he caught fish in deep pools 




with invisible fingers and ate them raw. one day it was very hot, and as he 
was bending over a pool, he felt a burning on the back of his head) and a 
dazzling light from the water pained his wet eyes. he wondered at it, for he 
had almost forgotten about the sun. then for the last time he looked up and 
shook his fist at her. 

'but as he lowered his eyes, he saw far above the tops of the misty 
mountains, out of which the stream came. and he thought suddenly: "it would 
be cool and shady under those mountains. the sun could not watch me there. 
the roots of those mountains must be roots indeed; there must be great 
secrets buried there which have not been discovered since the beginning." 

’so he journeyed by night up into the highlands, and he found a little 
cave out of which the dark stream ran; and he wormed his way like a maggot 
into the heart of the hills, and vanished out of all knowledge. the ring 
went into the shadows with him, and even the maker, when his power had 
begun 

to grow again, could learn nothing of it.' 

'gollum!' cried frodo. 'gollum? do you mean that this is the very 
gollum-creature that bilbo met? how loathsome!' 

'i think it is a sad story,' said the wizard, 'and it might have 
happened to others, even to some hobbits that i have known.' 

'i can't believe that gollum was connected with hobbits, however 
distantly,' said frodo with some heat. 'what an abominable notion!' 

'it is true all the same,' replied gandalf. 'about their origins, at 
any rate, i know more than hobbits do themselves. and even bilbo's story 
suggests the kinship. there was a great deal in the background of their 
minds and memories that was very similar. they understood one another 
remarkably well, very much better than a hobbit would understand, say, a 
dwarf, or an ore, or even an elf. think of the riddles they both knew, for 
one thing.' 

'yes,' said frodo. 'though other folks besides hobbits ask riddles, and 
of much the same sort. and hobbits don't cheat. gollum meant to cheat all 
the time. he was just trying to put poor bilbo off his guard. and i daresay 
it amused his wickedness to start a game which might end in providing him 
with an easy victim, but if he lost would not hurt him.' 

'only too true, i fear,' said gandalf. 'but there was something else in 
it, i think, which you don't see yet. even gollum was not wholly ruined. he 
had proved tougher than even one of the wise would have guessed -as a hobbit 




might. there was a little corner of his mind that was still his own, and 
light came through it, as through a chink in the dark: light out of the 
past. it was actually pleasant, i think, to hear a kindly voice again, 
bringing up memories of wind, and trees, and sun on the grass, and such 
forgotten things. 

'but that, of course, would only make the evil part of him angrier in 
the end - unless it could be conquered. unless it could be cured.' gandalf 
sighed. 'alas! there is little hope of that for him. yet not no hope. no, 
not though he possessed the ring so long, almost as far back as he can 
remember. for it was long since he had worn it much: in the black darkness 
it was seldom needed. certainly he had never "faded". he is thin and tough 
still. but the thing was eating up his mind, of course, and the torment had 
become almost unbearable. 

'all the "great secrets" under the mountains had turned out to be just 
empty night: there was nothing more to find out, nothing worth doing, only 
nasty furtive eating and resentful remembering. he was altogether wretched. 
he hated the dark, and he hated light more: he hated everything, and the 
ring most of all.' 

'what do you mean?' said frodo. 'surely the ring was his precious and 
the only thing he cared for? but if he hated it, why didn't he get rid of 
it, or go away and leave it?' 

'you ought to begin to understand, frodo, after all you have heard,' 
said gandalf. 'he hated it and loved it, as he hated and loved himself. he 
could not get rid of it. he had no will left in the matter. 

'a ring of power looks after itself, frodo. it may slip off 
treacherously, but its keeper never abandons it. at most he plays with the 
idea of handing it on to someone else's care - and that only at an early 
stage, when it first begins to grip. but as far as i know bilbo alone in 
history has ever gone beyond playing, and really done it. he needed all my 
help, too. and even so he would never have just forsaken it, or cast it 
aside. it was not gollum, frodo, but the ring itself that decided things. 

the ring left him. ' 

'what, just in time to meet bilbo?' said frodo. 'wouldn't an ore have 
suited it better?' 

'it is no laughing matter,' said gandalf. 'not for you. it was the 
strangest event in the whole history of the ring so far: bilbo's arrival 
just at that time, and putting his hand on it, blindly, in the dark. 




'there was more than one power at work, frodo. the ring was trying to 
get back to its master. it had slipped from isildur's hand and betrayed him; 
then when a chance came it caught poor deal, and he was murdered; and after 
that gollum, and it had devoured him. it could make no further use of him: 
he was too small and mean; and as long as it stayed with him he would never 
leave his deep pool again. so now, when its master was awake once more and 
sending out his dark thought from mirkwood, it abandoned gollum. only to 
be 

picked up by the most unlikely person imaginable: bilbo from the shire! 

'behind that there was something else at work, beyond any design of the 
ring-maker. i can put it no plainer than by saying that bilbo was meant to 
find the ring, and not by its maker. in which case you also were meant to 
have it. and that maybe an encouraging thought.' 

it is not,' said frodo. "though i am not sure that i understand you. 

but how have you learned all this about the ring, and about gollum? do you 
really know it all, or are you just guessing still?' 

gandalf looked at frodo, and his eyes glinted. i knew much and i have 
learned much,' he answered. 'but i am not going to give an account of all my 
doings to you. the history of elendil and isildur and the one ring is known 
to all the wise. your ring is shown to be that one ring by the fire- writing 
alone, apart from any other evidence.' 'and when did you discover that?' 
asked frodo, interrupting. 'just now in this room, of course,' answered the 
wizard sharply. 'but i expected to find it. i have come back from dark 
journeys and long search to make that final test. it is the last proof, and 
all is now only too clear. making out gollum's part, and fitting it into the 
gap in the history, required some thought. i may have started with guesses 
about gollum, but i am not guessing now. i know. i have seen him.' 

'you have seen gollum?' exclaimed frodo in amazement. 

'yes. the obvious thing to do, of course, if one could. i tried long 
ago; but i have managed it at last.' 

'then what happened after bilbo escaped from him? do you know that?' 

'not so clearly. what i have told you is what gollum was willing to 
tell - though not, of course, in the way i have reported it. gollum is a 
liar, and you have to sift his words. for instance, he called the ring his 
"birthday present", and he stuck to that. he said it came from his 
grandmother, who had lots of beautiful things of that kind. a ridiculous 
story. i have no doubt that smjagol's grandmother was a matriarch, a great 




person in her way, but to talk of her possessing many elven-rings was 
absurd, and as for giving them away, it was a lie. but a lie with a grain of 
truth. 

'the murder of deal haunted gollum, and he had made up a defence, 
repeating it to his "precious" over and over again, as he gnawed bones in 
the dark, until he almost believed it. it was his birthday. deal ought to 
have given the ring to him. it had previously turned up just so as to be a 
present. it was his birthday present, and so on, and on. 

i endured him as long as i could, but the truth was desperately 
important, and in the end i had to be harsh. i put the fear of fire on him, 
and wrung the true story out of him, bit by bit, together with much 
snivelling and snarling. he thought he was misunderstood and ill-used. but 
when he had at last told me his history, as far as the end of the 
riddle-game and bilbo's escape, he would not say any more, except in dark 
hints. some other fear was on him greater than mine. he muttered that he was 
going to gel his own back. people would see if he would stand being kicked, 
and driven into a hole and then robbed. gollum had good friends now, good 
friends and very strong. they would help him. baggins would pay for it. that 
was his chief thought. he hated bilbo and cursed his name. what is more, he 
knew where he came from.' 

'but how did he find that out?' asked frodo. 

'well, as for the name, bilbo very foolishly told gollum himself; and 
after that it would not be difficult to discover his country, once gollum 
came out. oh yes, he came out. his longing for the ring proved stronger than 
his fear of the ores, or even of the light. after a year or two he left the 
mountains. you see, though still bound by desire of it, the ring was no 
longer devouring him; he began to revive a little. he felt old, terribly 
old, yet less timid, and he was mortally hungry. 

'light, light of sun and moon, he still feared and hated, and he always 
will, i think; but he was cunning. he found he could hide from daylight and 
moonshine, and make his way swiftly and softly by dead of night with his 
pale cold eyes, and catch small frightened or unwary things. he grew 
stronger and bolder with new food and new air. he found his way into 
mirkwood, as one would expect.' 

'is that where you found him?' asked frodo. 

'i saw him there,' answered gandalf, 'but before that he had wandered 
far, following bilbo's trail. it was difficult to learn anything from him 




for certain, for his talk was constantly interrupted by curses and threats. 

"what had it got in its pocketses?" he said. "it wouldn't say, no precious. 

little cheat. not a fair question. it cheated first, it did. it broke the 
rules. we ought to have squeezed it, yes precious. and we will, precious!" 

’that is a sample of his talk. i don't suppose you want any more. i had 
weary days of it. but from hints dropped among the snarls i even gathered 
that his padding feet had taken him at last to esgaroth, and even to the 
streets of dale, listening secretly and peering. well, the news of the great 
events went far and wide in wilderland, and many had heard bilbo's name and 
knew where he came from. we had made no secret of our return journey to his 
home in the west. gollum's sharp ears would soon learn what he wanted.' 

'then why didn't he track bilbo further?' asked frodo. 'why didn't he 
come to the shire?' 

'ah,' said gandalf, 'now we come to it. i think gollum tried to. he set 
out and came back westward, as far as the great river. but then he turned 
aside. he was not daunted by the distance, i am sure. no, something else 
drew him away. so my friends think, those that hunted him for me. 

'the wood -elves tracked him first, an easy task for them, for his trail 
was still fresh then. through mirkwood and back again it led them, though 
they never caught him. the wood was full of the rumour of him, dreadful 
tales even among beasts and birds. the woodmen said that there was some 
new 

terror abroad, a ghost that drank blood. it climbed trees to find nests; it 
crept into holes to find the young; it slipped through windows to find 
cradles. 

'but at the western edge of mirkwood the trail turned away. it wandered 
off southwards and passed out of the wood-elves' ken, and was lost. and then 
i made a great mistake. yes, frodo, and not the first; though i fear it may 
prove the worst. i let the matter be. i let him go; for i had much else to 
think of at that time, and i still trusted the lore of saruman. 

'well, that was years ago. i have paid for it since with many dark and 
dangerous days. the trail was long cold when i took it up again, after bilbo 
left here. and my search would have been in vain, but for the help that i 
had from a friend: aragorn, the greatest traveller and huntsman of this age 
of the world. together we sought for gollum down the whole length of 
wilderland, without hope, and without success. but at last, when i had given 
up the chase and turned to other parts, gollum was found. my friend returned 




out of the great perils bringing the miserable creature with him. 

’what he had been doing he would not say. he only wept and called us 
cruel, with many a gollum in his throat; and when we pressed him he whined 
and cringed, and rubbed his long hands, licking his fingers as if they 
pained him, as if he remembered some old torture. but i am afraid there is 
no possible doubt: he had made his slow, sneaking way, step by step, mile by 
mile, south, down at last to the land of mordor.' 

a heavy silence fell in the room. frodo could hear his heart beating. 

even outside everything seemed still. no sound of sam's shears could now be 
heard. 

’yes, to mordor,' said gandalf. 'alas! mordor draws all wicked things, 
and the dark power was bending all its will to gather them there. the ring 
of the enemy would leave its mark, too, leave him open to the summons. and 
all folk were whispering then of the new shadow in the south, and its hatred 
of the west. there were his fine new friends, who would help him in his 
revenge ! 

'wretched fool! in that land he would learn much, too much for his 
comfort. and sooner or later as he lurked and pried on the borders he would 
be caught, and taken - for examination. that was the way of it, i fear. when 
he was found he had already been there long, and was on his way back. on 
some errand of mischief. but that does not matter much now. his worst 
mischief was done. 

'yes, alas! through him the enemy has learned that the one has been 
found again. he knows where isildur fell. he knows where gollum found his 
ring. he knows that it is a great ring, for it gave long life. he knows that 
it is not one of the three, for they have never been lost, and they endure 
no evil. he knows that it is not one of the seven, or the nine, for they are 
accounted for. he knows that it is the one. and he has at last heard, i 
think, of hobbits and the shire. 

'the shire - he may be seeking for it now, if he has not already found 
out where it lies. indeed, frodo, i fear that he may even think that the 
long -unnoticed name of baggins has become important.' 

'but this is terrible!' cried frodo. 'far worse than the worst that i 
imagined from your hints and warnings. o gandalf, best of friends, what am i 
to do? for now i am really afraid. what am i to do? what a pity that bilbo 
did not stab that vile creature, when he had a chance!' 

'pity? it was pity that stayed his hand. pity, and mercy: not to strike 




without need. and he has been well rewarded, frodo. be sure that he took so 
little hurt from the evil, and escaped in the end, because he began his 
ownership of the ring so. with pity.' 

'i am sorry,' said frodo. 'but i am frightened; and i do not feel any 
pity for gollum.' 

'you have not seen him,' gandalf broke in. 

'no, and i don't want to,' said frodo. i can't understand you. do you 
mean to say that you, and the elves, have let him live on after all those 
horrible deeds? now at any rate he is as bad as an ore, and just an enemy. 
he deserves death.' 

'deserves it! i daresay he does. many that live deserve death. and some 
that die deserve life. can you give it to them? then do not be too eager to 
deal out death in judgement. for even the very wise cannot see all ends. i 
have not much hope that gollum can be cured before he dies, but there is a 
chance of it. and he is bound up with the fate of the ring. my heart tells 
me that he has some part to play yet, for good or ill, before the end; and 
when that comes, the pity of bilbo may rule the fate of many - yours not 
least. in any case we did not kill him: he is very old and very wretched. 

the wood-elves have him in prison, but they treat him with such kindness as 
they can find in their wise hearts.' 

'all the same,' said frodo, 'even if bilbo could not kill gollum, i 
wish he had not kept the ring. i wish he had never found it, and that i had 
not got it! why did you let me keep it? why didn't you make me throw it 
away, or, or destroy it?' 

'let you? make you?' said the wizard. 'haven't you been listening to 
all that i have said? you are not thinking of what you are saying. but as 
for throwing it away, that was obviously wrong. these rings have a way of 
being found. in evil hands it might have done great evil. worst of all, it 
might have fallen into the hands of the enemy. indeed it certainly would; 
for this is the one, and he is exerting all his power to find it or draw it 
to himself. 

'of course, my dear frodo, it was dangerous for you; and that has 
troubled me deeply. but there was so much at stake that i had to take some 
risk - though even when i was far away there has never been a day when the 
shire has not been guarded by watchful eyes. as long as you never used it, i 
did not think that the ring would have any lasting effect on you, not for 
evil, not at any rate for a very long time. and you must remember that nine 




years ago, when i last saw you, i still knew little for certain.' 

'but why not destroy it, as you say should have been done long ago?' 
cried frodo again. if you had warned me, or even sent me a message, i would 
have done away with it.' 

'would you? how would you do that? have you ever tried?' 

'no. but i suppose one could hammer it or melt it.' 

'try!' said gandalf. try now!' 

frodo drew the ring out of his pocket again and looked at it. it now 
appeared plain and smooth, without mark or device that he could see. the 
gold looked very fair and pure, and frodo thought how rich and beautiful was 
its colour, how perfect was its roundness. it was an admirable thing and 
altogether precious. when he took it out he had intended to fling it from 
him into the very hottest part of the fire. but he found now that he could 
not do so, not without a great struggle. he weighed the ring in his hand, 
hesitating, and forcing himself to remember all that gandalf had told him; 
and then with an effort of will he made a movement, as if to cast it away - 
but he found that he had put it back in his pocket. 

gandalf laughed grimly. 'you see? already you too, frodo, cannot easily 
let it go, nor will to damage it. and i could not "make" you - except by 
force, which would break your mind. but as for breaking the ring, force is 
useless. even if you took it and struck it with a heavy sledge-hammer, it 
would make no dint in it. it cannot be unmade by your hands, or by mine. 

'your small fire, of course, would not melt even ordinary gold. this 
ring has already passed through it unscathed, and even unheated. but there 
is no smith's forge in this shire that could change it at all. not even the 
anvils and furnaces of the dwarves could do that. it has been said that 
dragon-fire could melt and consume the rings of power, but there is not now 
any dragon left on earth in which the old fire is hot enough; nor was there 
ever any dragon, not even ancalagon the black, who could have harmed the 
one 

ring, the ruling ring, for that was made by sauron himself. there is only 
one way: to find the cracks of doom in the depths of orodruin, the 
fire-mountain, and cast the ring in there, if you really wish to destroy it, 
to put it beyond the grasp of the enemy for ever.' 

'i do really wish to destroy it!' cried frodo. 'or, well, to have it 
destroyed. i am not made for perilous quests. i wish i had never seen the 
ring ! why did it come to me? why was i chosen?' 




’such questions cannot be answered,' said gandalf. 'you may be sure 
that it was not for any merit that others do not possess: not for power or 
wisdom, at any rate. but you have been chosen, and you must therefore use 
such strength and heart and wits as you have.' 

'but i have so little of any of these things! you are wise and 
powerful. will you not take the ring?' 

'no!' cried gandalf, springing to his feet. 'with that power i should 
have power too great and terrible. and over me the ring would gain a power 
still greater and more deadly.' his eyes flashed and his face was lit as by 
a fire within. 'do not tempt me! for i do not wish to become like the dark 
lord himself. yet the way of the ring to my heart is by pity, pity for 
weakness and the desire of strength to do good. do not tempt me! i dare not 
take it, not even to keep it safe, unused. the wish to wield it would be too 
great, for my strength. i shall have such need of it. great perils lie 
before me.' 

he went to the window and drew aside the curtains and the shutters. 
sunlight streamed back again into the room. sam passed along the path 
outside whistling. 'and now,' said the wizard, turning back to frodo, 'the 
decision lies with you. but i will always help you.' he laid his hand on 
frodo's shoulder. 'i will help you bear this burden, as long as it is yours 
to bear. but we must do something, soon. the enemy is moving.' 

there was a long silence. gandalf sat down again and puffed at his 
pipe, as if lost in thought. his eyes seemed closed, but under the lids he 
was watching frodo intently. frodo gazed fixedly at the red embers on the 
hearth, until they filled all his vision, and he seemed to be looking down 
into profound wells of fire. he was thinking of the fabled cracks of doom 
and the terror of the fiery mountain. 

'well!' said gandalf at last. 'what are you thinking about? have you 
decided what to do?' 

'no!' answered frodo, coming back to himself out of darkness, and 
finding to his surprise that it was not dark, and that out of the window he 
could see the sunlit garden. 'or perhaps, yes. as far as i understand what 
you have said, i suppose i must keep the ring and guard it, at least for the 
present, whatever it may do to me.' 

'whatever it may do, it will be slow, slow to evil, if you keep it with 
that purpose,' said gandalf. 

'i hope so,' said frodo. 'but i hope that you may find some other 




better keeper soon. but in the meanwhile it seems that i am a danger, a 
danger to all that live near me. i cannot keep the ring and stay here. i 
ought to leave bag end, leave the shire, leave everything and go away.’ he 
sighed. 

'i should like to save the shire, if i could - though there have been 
times when i thought the inhabitants too stupid and dull for words, and have 
felt that an earthquake or an invasion of dragons might be good for them. 
but i don't feel like that now. i feel that as long as the shire lies 
behind, safe and comfortable, i shall find wandering more bearable: i shall 
know that somewhere there is a firm foothold, even if my feet cannot stand 
there again. 

'of course, i have sometimes thought of going away, but i imagined that 
as a kind of holiday, a series of adventures like bilbo's or better, ending 
in peace. but this would mean exile, a flight from danger into danger, 
drawing it after me. and i suppose i must go alone, if i am to do that and 
save the shire. but i feel very small, and very uprooted, and well - 
desperate. the enemy is so strong and terrible.' 

he did not tell gandalf, but as he was speaking a great desire to 
follow bilbo flamed up in his heart - to follow bilbo, and even perhaps to 
find him again. it was so strong that it overcame his fear: he could almost 
have run out there and then down the road without his hat, as bilbo had done 
on a similar morning long ago. 

'my dear frodo!' exclaimed gandalf. 'hobbits really are amazing 
creatures, as i have said before. you can learn all that there is to know 
about their ways in a month, and yet after a hundred years they can still 
surprise you at a pinch. i hardly expected to get such an answer, not even 
from you. but bilbo made no mistake in choosing his heir, though he little 
thought how important it would prove. i am afraid you are right. the ring 
will not be able to stay hidden in the shire much longer; and for your own 
sake, as well as for others, you will have to go, and leave the name of 
baggins behind you. that name will not be safe to have, outside the shire or 
in the wild. i will give you a travelling name now. when you go, go as mr. 
underhill. 

'but i don't think you need go alone. not if you know of anyone you can 
trust, and who would be willing to go by your side - and that you would be 
willing to take into unknown perils. but if you look for a companion, be 
careful in choosing! and be careful of what you say, even to your closest 




friends! the enemy has many spies and many ways of hearing.' 

suddenly he stopped as if listening. frodo became aware that all was 
very quiet, inside and outside. gandalf crept to one side of the window. 
then with a dart he sprang to the sill, and thrust a long arm out and 
downwards. there was a squawk, and up came sam gamgee's curly head 
hauled by 
one ear. 

'well, well, bless my beard!' said gandalf. 'sam gamgee is it? now what 
may you be doing?' 

'lor bless you, mr. gandalf, sir!' said sam. 'nothing! leastways i was 
just trimming the grass-border under the window, if you follow me.' he 
picked up his shears and exhibited them as evidence. 

'i don't,' said gandalf grimly. it is some time since i last heard the 
sound of your shears. how long have you been eavesdropping?' 

'eavesdropping, sir? i don't follow you, begging your pardon. there 
ain't no eaves at bag end, and that's a fact.' 

'don't be a fool! what have you heard, and why did you listen?' 
gandalf s eyes flashed and his brows stuck out like bristles. 

'mr. frodo, sir!' cried sam quaking. 'don't let him hurt me, sir! don't 
let him turn me into anything unnatural! my old dad would take on so. i 
meant no harm, on my honour, sir!' 

'he won't hurt you,' said frodo, hardly able to keep from laughing, 
although he was himself startled and rather puzzled. 'he knows, as well as i 
do, that you mean no harm. but just you up and answer his questions straight 
away!' 

'well, sir,' said sam dithering a little. 'i heard a deal that i didn't 
rightly understand, about an enemy, and rings, and mr. bilbo, sir, and 
dragons, and a fiery mountain, and - and elves, sir. i listened because i 
couldn't help myself, if you know what i mean. lor bless me, sir, but i do 
love tales of that sort. and i believe them too, whatever ted may say. 
elves, sir! i would dearly love to see them. couldn't you take me to see 
elves, sir, when you go?' 

suddenly gandalf laughed. 'come inside!' he shouted, and putting out 
both his arms he lifted the astonished sam, shears, grass-clippings and all, 
right through the window and stood him on the floor. 'take you to see elves, 
eh?' he said, eyeing sam closely, but with a smile flickering on his face. 

'so you heard that mr. frodo is going away?' 




'i did, sir. and that's why i choked: which you heard seemingly. i 
tried not to, sir, but it burst out of me: i was so upset.' 

'it can't be helped, sam,' said frodo sadly. he had suddenly realized 
that flying from the shire would mean more painful partings than merely 
saying farewell to the familiar comforts of bag end. 'i shall have to go. 
but' - and here he looked hard at sam - 'if you really care about me, you 
will keep that dead secret. see? if you don't, if you even breathe a word of 
what you've heard here, then i hope gandalf will turn you into a spotted 
toad and fill the garden full of grass-snakes.' 

sam fell on his knees, trembling. 'get up, sam!' said gandalf. i have 
thought of something better than that. something to shut your mouth, and 
punish you properly for listening. you shall go away with mr. frodo!' 

'me, sir!' cried sam, springing up like a dog invited for a walk. 'me 
go and see elves and all! hooray!' he shouted, and then burst into tears. 
