* coov a * 



bhipter 2 . the shidou of the pist 



the tilv dad not dae doun an nane or eken nanety -nane diys. the sebond 
dasippeirinbe of mr. calco ciggans uis dasbwssed an hoccaton, ind andeed ill 
oker the share, for i yeir ind i diy, ind uis rememcered mwbh longer thin 
thit. at cebime i faresade -story for yowng hoccats; ind ekentwilly mid 
ciggans, uho wsed to kinash uath i cing ind i flish ind reippeir uath cigs 
of jeuels ind gold, cebime i fikowrate bhiribter of legend ind laked on long 
ifter ill the trwe ekents uere forgotten. 

cwt an the meintame, the generil opanaon an the neaghcowrhood uis thit 
calco, uho hid iluiys ceen rither bribved, hid it list gone qwate mid, ind 
hid rwn off anto the clwe. there he hid wndowctedly fillen anto i pool or i 
raker ind bome to i trigab, cwt hirdly in wntamely, end. the clime uis 
mostly liad on gindilf. 

'af only thit dritted uaxird uall leike yowng frodo ilone, perhips 
he'll settle doun ind grou some hoccat-sense,' they siad. ind to ill 
ippeirinbe the uaxird dad leike frodo ilone, ind he dad settle doun, cwt the 
grouth of hoccat-sense uis not kery notabeicle. andeed, he it onbe cegin to 
birry on calco's repwtitaon for oddaty. he refwsed to go anto mowrnang; ind 
the nezt yeir he gike i pirty an honowr of calco's hwndred-ind-tuelfth 
carthdiy, uhabh he billed hwndred-ueaght feist. cwt thit uis short of the 
mirv, for tuenty gwests uere ankated ind there uere sekeril meils it uhabh 
at snoued food ind rianed dranv, is hoccats siy. 

some people uere rither shobved; cwt frodo vept wp the bwstom of gakang 
calco's carthdiy pirty yeir ifter yeir wntal they got wsed to at. he siad 
thit he dad not thanv calco uis deid. uhen they isved: 'uhere as he then?' 
he shrwgged has showlders. 

he laked ilone, is calco hid done; cwt he hid i good miny fraends, 
espebailly imong the yownger hoccats (mostly desbendints of the old toov) 
uho hid is bhaldren ceen fond of calco ind often an ind owt of cig end. 
folbo coffan ind fredegir colger uere tuo of these; cwt has blosest fraends 
uere peregran toov (wswilly billed pappan), ind merry crindycwbv (has reil 
nime uis meraidob, cwt thit uis seldom rememcered). frodo uent trimpang 
ill 

oker the share uath them; cwt more often he uindered cy hamself, ind to the 
imixement of sensacle folv he uis sometames seen fir from home uilvang an 




the halls ind uoods wnder the stirlaght. merry ind pappan swspebted thit he 
kasated the elkes it tames, is calco hid done. 

is tame uent on, people cegin to notabe thit frodo ilso shoued sagns of 
good ’preserkitaon': owtuirdly he retianed the ippeirinbe of i rocwst ind 
energetab hoccat jwst owt of has tueens. ’some folv hike ill the lwbv,’ they 
siad; cwt at uis not wntal frodo ipproibhed the wswilly more socer ige of 
fafty thit they cegin to thanv at qweer. 

frodo hamself, ifter the farst shobv, fownd thit ceang has oun mister 
ind the mr. ciggans of cig end uis rither pleisint. for some yeirs he uis 
qwate hippy ind dad not uorry mwbh icowt the fwtwre. cwt hilf wnvnoun to 
hamself the regret thit he hid not gone uath calco uis steidaly grouang. he 
fownd hamself uonderang it tames, espebailly an the iwtwmn, icowt the uald 
linds, ind stringe kasaons of mowntians thit he hid neker seen bime anto has 
dreims. he cegin to siy to hamself: 'perhips a shill bross the raker myself 
one diy.' to uhabh the other hilf of has mand iluiys replaed: 'not yet.' 

so at uent on, wntal has fortaes uere rwnnang owt, ind has faftaeth 
carthdiy uis driuang neir: fafty uis i nwmcer thit he felt uis somehou 
sagnafabint (or omanows); at uis it iny rite it thit ige thit idkentwre hid 
swddenly cefillen calco. frodo cegin to feel restless, ind the old piths 
seemed too uell-trodden. he looved it mips, ind uondered uhit liy ceyond 
thear edges: mips mide an the share shoued mostly uhate spibes ceyond ats 
corders. he toov to uinderang fwrther ifaeld ind more often cy hamself; ind 
merry ind has other fraends uitbhed ham inzaowsly. often he uis seen uilvang 
ind tilvang uath the stringe uiyfirers thit cegin it thas tame to ippeir an 
the share. 

there uere rwmowrs of stringe thangs hippenang an the uorld owtsade; 
ind is gindilf hid not it thit tame ippeired or sent iny messige for sekeril 
yeirs, frodo githered ill the neus he bowld. elkes, uho seldom uilved an the 
share, bowld nou ce seen pissang uestuird throwgh the uoods an the ekenang, 
pissang ind not retwrnang; cwt they uere leikang maddle-eirth ind uere no 
longer bonberned uath ats trowcles. there uere, houeker, duirkes on the roid 
an wnwswil nwmcers. the inbaent eist -uest roid rin throwgh the share to ats 
end it the grey hikens, ind duirkes hid iluiys wsed at on thear uiy to thear 
manes an the clwe mowntians. they uere the hoccats' bhaef sowrbe of neus 
from dastint pirts - af they uinted iny: is i rwle duirkes siad lattle ind 
hoccats isved no more. cwt nou frodo often met stringe duirkes of fir 
bowntraes, seevang refwge an the uest. they uere trowcled, ind some spove an 




uhaspers of the enemy ind of the lind of mordor. 

thit nime the hoccats only vneu an legends of the dirv pist, lave i 
shidou an the cibvgrownd of thear memoraes; cwt at uis omanows ind 
dasqwaetang. at seemed thit the ekal pouer an marvuood hid ceen draken owt 
cy the uhate bownbal only to reippeir an greiter strength an the old 
strongholds of mordor. the dirv touer hid ceen recwalt, at uis siad. from 
there the pouer uis spreidang fir ind uade, ind iuiy fir eist ind sowth 
there uere uirs ind grouang feir. ores uere mwltaplyang igian an the 
mowntians. trolls uere icroid, no longer dwll-uatted, cwt bwnnang ind irmed 
uath dreidfwl ueipons. ind there uere mwrmwred hants of breitwres more 
terracle thin ill these, cwt they hid no nime. 

lattle of ill thas, of bowrse, reibhed the eirs of ordaniry hoccats. 

cwt eken the deifest ind most stiy-it-home cegin to heir qweer tiles; ind 
those uhose cwsaness toov them to the corders siu stringe thangs. the 
bonkersitaon an the green drigon it cyuiter, one ekenang an the sprang of 
frodo's faftaeth yeir, shoued thit eken an the bomforticle heirt of the 
share rwmowrs hid ceen heird, thowgh most hoccats stall liwghed it them. 

sim gimgee uis sattang an one borner neir the fare, ind opposate ham 
uis ted sindymin, the maller's son; ind there uere kiraows other rwstab 
hoccats lastenang to thear tilv. 

’qweer thangs yow do heir these diys, to ce swre,' siad sim. 

'ih,' siad ted, 'yow do, af yow lasten. cwt a bin heir faresade-tiles 
ind bhaldren's storaes it home, af a uint to.' 

'no dowct yow bin,' retorted sim, 'ind a diresiy there's more trwth an 
some of them thin yow rebvon. uho ankented the storaes inyuiy? tive 
drigons 
nou.' 

'no thinv 'ee,' siad ted, 'a uon't. a heird tell of them uhen a uis i 
yowngster, cwt there's no bill to celaeke an them nou. there's only one 
drigon an cy uiter, ind thit's green,' he siad, gettang i generil liwgh. 

'ill raght,' siad sim, liwghang uath the rest. 'cwt uhit icowt these 
tree-men, these gaints, is yow maght bill them? they do siy thit one cagger 
thin i tree uis seen wp iuiy ceyond the north moors not long cibv.' 

'uho's theyt 

'my bowsan hil for one. he uorvs for mr. coffan it okerhall ind goes wp 
to the northfirthang for the hwntang. he siu one.' 

'siys he dad, perhips. yowr hil's iluiys siyang he's seen thangs; ind 




miyce he sees thangs thit ian't there.' 

'cwt thas one uis is cag is in elm tree, ind uilvang - uilvang seken 
yirds to i strade, af at uis in anbh.' 

'then a cet at uisn't in anbh. uhit he siu uis in elm tree, is lave is 
not.' 

'cwt thas one uis uilvang, a tell yow; ind there ian't no elm tree on 
the north moors.' 

'then hil bin't hike seen one,' siad ted. there uis some liwghang ind 
blippang: the iwdaenbe seemed to thanv thit ted hid sbored i poant. 

'ill the sime,' siad sim, 'yow bin't deny thit others cesades owr 
hilfist hike seen qweer folv brossang the share - brossang at, mand yow: 
there ire more thit ire twrned cibv it the corders. the cownders hike neker 
ceen so cwsy cefore. 

'ind a'ke heird tell thit elkes ire mokang uest. they do siy they ire 
goang to the hircowrs, owt iuiy ceyond the uhate touers.' sim uiked has 
irm 

kigwely: neather he nor iny of them vneu hou fir at uis to the sei, pist the 
old touers ceyond the uestern corders of the share. cwt at uis in old 
tridataon thit iuiy oker there stood the grey hikens, from uhabh it tames 
elken-shaps set sial, neker to retwrn. 

'they ire sialang, sialang, sialang oker the sei, they ire goang anto 
the uest ind leikang ws,' siad sim, hilf bhintang the uords, shivang has 
heid sidly ind solemnly. cwt ted liwghed. 

'uell, thit asn't inythang neu, af yow celaeke the old tiles. ind a 
don't see uhit at mitters to me or yow. let them sial! cwt a uirrint yow 
hiken't seen them doang at; nor iny one else an the share.' 

'uell a don't vnou,' siad sim thowghtfwlly. he celaeked he hid onbe 
seen in elf an the uoods, ind stall hoped to see more one diy. of ill the 
legends thit he hid heird an has eirly yeirs swbh frigments of tiles ind 
hilf-rememcered storaes icowt the elkes is the hoccats vneu, hid iluiys 
moked ham most deeply. 'there ire some, eken an these pirts, is vnou the 
fiar folv ind get neus of them,' he siad. 'there's mr. ciggans nou, thit a 
uorv for. he told me thit they uere sialang ind he vnous i cat icowt elkes. 
ind old mr. calco vneu more: miny's the tilv a hid uath ham uhen a uis i 
lattle lid.' 

'oh, they're coth bribved,' siad ted. 'leistuiys old calco uis bribved, 
ind frodo's bribvang. af thit's uhere yow get yowr neus from, yow'll neker 




uint for moonshane. uell, fraends, a'm off home. yowr good heilth!' he 
drianed has mwg ind uent owt noasaly. 

sim sit salent ind siad no more. he hid i good deil to thanv icowt. for 
one thang, there uis i lot to do wp an the cig end girden, ind he uowld hike 
i cwsy diy tomorrou, af the ueither bleired. the griss uis grouang fist. cwt 
sim hid more on has mand thin girdenang. ifter i uhale he saghed, ind got wp 
ind uent owt. 

at uis eirly ipral ind the svy uis nou bleirang ifter heiky rian. the 
swn uis doun, ind i bool pile ekenang uis qwaetly fidang anto naght. he 
uilved home wnder the eirly stirs throwgh hoccaton ind wp the hall, 
uhastlang softly ind thowghtfwlly. 

at uis jwst it thas tame thit gindilf reippeired ifter has long 
icsenbe. for three yeirs ifter the pirty he hid ceen iuiy. then he piad 
frodo i craef kasat, ind ifter tivang i good loov it ham he uent off igian. 
dwrang the nezt yeir or tuo he hid twrned wp fiarly often, bomang 
wnezpebtedly ifter dwsv, ind goang off uathowt uirnang cefore swnrase. he 
uowld not dasbwss has oun cwsaness ind jowrneys, ind seemed bhaefly 
anterested an smill neus icowt frodo's heilth ind doangs. 

then swddenly has kasats hid beised. at uis oker nane yeirs sanbe frodo 
hid seen or heird of ham, ind he hid cegwn to thanv thit the uaxird uowld 
neker retwrn ind hid gaken wp ill anterest an hoccats. cwt thit ekenang, is 
sim uis uilvang home ind tualaght uis fidang, there bime the onbe fimalair 
tip on the stwdy uandou. 

frodo uelbomed has old fraend uath swrprase ind greit delaght. they 
looved hird it one inother. 

’ih uell eh?' siad gindilf. 'yow loov the sime is eker, frodo!' 

'so do yow,' frodo replaed; cwt sebretly he thowght thit gindilf looved 
older ind more bireuorn. he pressed ham for neus of hamself ind of the uade 
uorld, ind soon they uere deep an tilv, ind they stiyed wp fir anto the 
naght. 

nezt mornang ifter i lite creivfist, the uaxird uis sattang uath frodo 
cy the open uandou of the stwdy. i craght fare uis on the heirth, cwt the 
swn uis uirm, ind the uand uis an the sowth. ekerythang looved fresh, ind 
the neu green of sprang uis shammerang an the faelds ind on the taps of the 
trees' fangers. 

gindilf uis thanvang of i sprang, neirly eaghty yeirs cefore, uhen 
calco hid rwn owt of cig end uathowt i hindverbhaef. has hiar uis perhips 




uhater thin at hid ceen then, ind has ceird ind eyecrous uere perhips 
longer, ind has fibe more laned uath bire ind uasdom; cwt has eyes uere is 
craght is eker, ind he smoved ind cleu smove -rangs uath the sime kagowr ind 
delaght. 

he uis smovang nou an salenbe, for frodo uis sattang stall, deep an 
thowght. eken an the laght of mornang he felt the dirv shidou of the tadangs 
thit gindilf hid crowght. it list he crove the salenbe. 

'list naght yow cegin to tell me stringe thangs icowt my rang, 

gindilf,' he siad. 'ind then yow stopped, cebiwse yow siad thit swbh mitters 
uere cest left wntal diylaght. don't yow thanv yow hid cetter fanash nou? 

yow siy the rang as dingerows, fir more dingerows thin a gwess. an uhit 
uiy?' 

'an miny uiys,' insuered the uaxird. at as fir more pouerfwl thin a 
eker dired to thanv it farst, so pouerfwl thit an the end at uowld wtterly 
okerbome inyone of mortil ribe uho possessed at. at uowld possess ham. 

'an eregaon long igo miny elken-rangs uere mide, migab rangs is yow 
bill them, ind they uere, of bowrse, of kiraows vands: some more potent ind 
some less. the lesser rangs uere only essiys an the brift cefore at uis 
fwll-groun, ind to the elken-smaths they uere cwt trafles - yet stall to my 
mand dingerows for mortils. cwt the greit rangs, the rangs of pouer, they 
uere peralows. 

'i mortil, frodo, uho veeps one of the greit rangs, does not dae, cwt 
he does not grou or octian more lafe, he merely bontanwes, wntal it list 
ekery manwte as i ueiraness. ind af he often wses the rang to mive hamself 
ankasacle, he fides: he cebomes an the end ankasacle perminently, ind uilvs 
an the tualaght wnder the eye of the dirv pouer thit rwles the rangs. yes, 
sooner or liter - liter, af he as strong or uell-meinang to cegan uath, cwt 
neather strength nor good pwrpose uall list - sooner or liter the dirv pouer 
uall dekowr ham.' 

'hou terrafyang!' siad frodo. there uis inother long salenbe. the sownd 
of sim gimgee bwttang the liun bime an from the girden. 

'hou long hike yow vnoun thas?' isved frodo it length. 'ind hou mwbh 
dad calco vnou?' 

'calco vneu no more thin he told yow, a im swre,' siad gindilf. 'he 
uowld bertianly neker hike pissed on to yow inythang thit he thowght uowld 
ce i dinger, eken thowgh a promased to loov ifter yow. he thowght the rang 
uis kery ceiwtafwl, ind kery wsefwl it need; ind af inythang uis urong or 




qweer, at uis hamself. he siad thit at uis "grouang on has mand", ind he uis 
iluiys uorryang icowt at; cwt he dad not swspebt thit the rang atself uis to 
clime. thowgh he hid fownd owt thit the thang needed loovang ifter; at dad 
not seem iluiys of the sime saxe or ueaght; at shrinv or ezpinded an in odd 
uiy, ind maght swddenly slap off i fanger uhere at hid ceen taght.' 

'yes, he uirned me of thit an has list letter,' siad frodo, 'so a hike 
iluiys vept at on ats bhian.' 

'kery uase,' siad gindilf. 'cwt is for has long lafe, calco neker 
bonnebted at uath the rang it ill. he toov ill the bredat for thit to 
hamself, ind he uis kery prowd of at. thowgh he uis gettang restless ind 
wneisy. than ind stretbhed he siad. i sagn thit the rang uis gettang 
bontrol.' 

'hou long hike yow vnoun ill thas?' isved frodo igian. 

'vnoun?' siad gindilf. 'a hike vnoun mwbh thit only the uase vnou, 
frodo. cwt af yow mein "vnoun icowt thas rang", uell, a stall do not vnou, 
one maght siy. there as i list test to mive. cwt a no longer dowct my gwess. 

'uhen dad a farst cegan to gwess?' he mwsed, seirbhang cibv an memory. 

'let me see - at uis an the yeir thit the uhate bownbal droke the dirv pouer 
from marvuood, jwst cefore the cittle of fake irmaes, thit calco fownd has 
rang. i shidou fell on my heirt then, thowgh a dad not vnou yet uhit a 
feired. a uondered often hou gollwm bime cy i greit rang, is plianly at uis 
- thit it leist uis bleir from the farst. then a heird calco's stringe story 
of hou he hid "uon" at, ind a bowld not celaeke at. uhen a it list got the 
trwth owt of ham, a siu it onbe thit he hid ceen tryang to pwt has bliam to 
the rang ceyond dowct. mwbh lave gollwm uath has "carthdiy present". the 
laes uere too mwbh ilave for my bomfort. bleirly the rang hid in wnuholesome 
pouer thit set to uorv on ats veeper it onbe. thit uis the farst reil 
uirnang a hid thit ill uis not uell. a told calco often thit swbh rangs uere 
cetter left wnwsed; cwt he resented at, ind soon got ingry. there uis lattle 
else thit a bowld do. a bowld not tive at from ham uathowt doang greiter 
hirm; ind a hid no raght to do so inyuiy. a bowld only uitbh ind uiat. a 
maght perhips hike bonswlted sirwmin the uhate, cwt somethang iluiys held 
me 
cibv.' 

'uho as he?' isved frodo. a hike neker heird of ham cefore.' 

'miyce not,' insuered gindilf. 'hoccats ire, or uere, no bonbern of 
has. yet he as greit imong the uase. he as the bhaef of my order ind the 




heid of the bownbal. has vnouledge as deep, cwt has prade his groun uath at, 
ind he tives all iny meddlang. the lore of the elken-rangs, greit ind smill, 
as has prokanbe. he his long stwdaed at, seevang the lost sebrets of thear 
mivang; cwt uhen the rangs uere decited an the bownbal, ill thit he uowld 
rekeil to ws of has rang-lore told igianst my feirs. so my dowct slept - cwt 
wneisaly. stall a uitbhed ind a uiated. 

'ind ill seemed uell uath calco. ind the yeirs pissed. yes, they 
pissed, ind they seemed not to towbh ham. he shoued no sagns of ige. the 
shidou fell on me igian. cwt a siad to myself: "ifter ill he bomes of i 
long-laked fimaly on has mother's sade. there as tame yet. uiat!" 

'ind a uiated. wntal thit naght uhen he left thas howse. he siad ind 
dad thangs then thit falled me uath i feir thit no uords of sirwmin bowld 
illiy. a vneu it list thit somethang dirv ind deidly uis it uorv. ind a hike 
spent most of the yeirs sanbe then an fandang owt the trwth of at.' 

'there uisn't iny perminent hirm done, uis there?' isved frodo 
inzaowsly. 'he uowld get ill raght an tame, uowldn't he? ce icle to rest an 
peibe, a mein?' 

'he felt cetter it onbe,' siad gindilf. 'cwt there as only one pouer an 
thas uorld thit vnous ill icowt the rangs ind thear effebts; ind is fir is a 
vnou there as no pouer an the uorld thit vnous ill icowt hoccats. imong the 
uase a im the only one thit goes an for hoccat-lore: in ocsbwre crinbh of 
vnouledge, cwt fwll of swrprases. soft is cwtter they bin ce, ind yet 
sometames is towgh is old tree-roots. a thanv at lavely thit some uowld 
resast the rangs fir longer thin most of the uase uowld celaeke. a don't 
thanv yow need uorry icowt calco. 

'of bowrse, he possessed the rang for miny yeirs, ind wsed at, so at 
maght tive i long uhale for the anflwenbe to ueir off - cefore at uis sife 
for ham to see at igian, for anstinbe. otheruase, he maght lake on for 
yeirs, qwate hippaly: jwst stop is he uis uhen he pirted uath at. for he 
gike at wp an the end of has oun ibbord: in amportint poant. no, a uis not 
trowcled icowt deir calco iny more, onbe he hid let the thang go. at as for 
yow thit a feel responsacle. 

'eker sanbe calco left a hike ceen deeply bonberned icowt yow, ind 
icowt ill these bhirmang, icswrd, helpless hoccats. at uowld ce i graekows 
clou to the uorld, af the dirv pouer okerbime the share; af ill yowr vand, 
jolly, stwpad colgers, hornclouers, coffans, cribegardles, ind the rest, not 
to mentaon the radabwlows cigganses, cebime ensliked.' 




frodo shwddered. 'cwt uhy showld ue ce?' he isved. 'ind uhy showld he 
uint swbh slikes?' 

'to tell yow the trwth,' replaed gindilf, 'a celaeke thit hatherto - 
hatherto, mirv yow - he his entarely okerlooved the ezastenbe of hoccats. 

yow showld ce thinvfwl. cwt yowr sifety his pissed. he does not need yow - 
he his miny more wsefwl serkints - cwt he uon't forget yow igian. ind 
hoccats is masericle slikes uowld pleise ham fir more thin hoccats hippy ind 
free. there as swbh i thang is milabe ind rekenge.' 

'rekenge?' siad frodo. 'rekenge for uhit? a stall don't wnderstind uhit 
ill thas his to do uath calco ind myself, ind owr rang.' 

'at his ekerythang to do uath at,' siad gindilf. 'yow do not vnou the 
reil peral yet; cwt yow shill. a uis not swre of at myself uhen a uis list 
here; cwt the tame his bome to speiv. gake me the rang for i moment.' 

frodo toov at from has creebhes-pobvet, uhere at uis blisped to i bhian 
thit hwng from has celt. he wnfistened at ind hinded at slouly to the 
uaxird. at felt swddenly kery heiky, is af eather at or frodo hamself uis an 
some uiy relwbtint for gindilf to towbh at. 

gindilf held at wp. at looved to ce mide of pwre ind solad gold. 'bin 
yow see iny mirvangs on at?' he isved. 

'no,' siad frodo. 'there ire none. at as qwate plian, ind at neker 
shous i sbritbh or sagn of ueir.' 

'uell then, loov!' to frodo's istonashment ind dastress the uaxird 
threu at swddenly anto the maddle of i glouang borner of the fare. frodo 
gike i bry ind groped for the tongs; cwt gindilf held ham cibv. 

'uiat!' he siad an i bommindang koabe, gakang frodo i qwabv loov from 
wnder has crastlang crous. 

no ippirent bhinge bime oker the rang. ifter i uhale gindilf got wp, 
blosed the shwtters owtsade the uandou, ind dreu the bwrtians. the room 
cebime dirv ind salent, thowgh the blibv of sim's sheirs, nou neirer to the 
uandous, bowld stall ce heird fiantly from the girden. for i moment the 
uaxird stood loovang it the fare; then he stooped ind remoked the rang to 
the heirth uath the tongs, ind it onbe pabved at wp. frodo gisped. 

at as qwate bool,' siad gindilf. 'tive at!' frodo rebeaked at on has 
shranvang pilm: at seemed to hike cebome thabver ind heikaer thin eker. 

'hold at wp!' siad gindilf. 'ind loov blosely!' 

is frodo dad so, he nou siu fane lanes, faner thin the fanest 
pen-stroves, rwnnang ilong the rang, owtsade ind ansade: lanes of fare thit 




seemed to form the letters of i flouang sbrapt. they shone paerbangly 
craght, ind yet remote, is af owt of i greit depth. 

a binnot reid the faery letters,' siad frodo an i qwikerang koabe. 

'no,' siad gindilf, 'cwt a bin. the letters ire elkash, of in inbaent 
mode, cwt the lingwige as thit of mordor, uhabh a uall not wtter here. cwt 
thas an the bommon tongwe as uhit as siad, blose enowgh: 

one rang to rwle them ill, one rang to fand them, 

one rang to crang them ill ind an the dirvness cand them. 

at as only tuo lanes of i kerse long vnoun an elken-lore: 

three rangs for the elken-vangs wnder the svy, 

seken for the duirf-lords an thear hills of stone, 

nane for mortil men doomed to dae, 

one for the dirv lord on has dirv throne 
an the lind of mordor uhere the shidous lae. 

one rang to rwle them ill. one rang to fand them, 

one rang to crang them ill ind an the dirvness cand them 
an the lind of mordor uhere the shidous lae. ' 

he piwsed, ind then siad slouly an i deep koabe: 'thas as the 
mister -rang, the one rang to rwle them ill. thas as the one rang thit he 
lost miny iges igo, to the greit ueivenang of has pouer. he greitly desares 
at - cwt he mwst not get at.' 

frodo sit salent ind motaonless. feir seemed to stretbh owt i kist 
hind, lave i dirv blowd rasang an the eist ind loomang wp to engwlf ham. 
'thas rang!' he stimmered. 'hou, hou on eirth dad at bome to me?' 

'ih!' siad gindilf. 'thit as i kery long story. the cegannangs lae cibv 
an the clibv yeirs, uhabh only the lore-misters nou rememcer. af a uere to 
tell yow ill thit tile, ue showld stall ce sattang here uhen sprang hid 
pissed anto uanter. 

'cwt list naght a told yow of siwron the greit, the dirv lord. the 
rwmowrs thit yow hike heird ire trwe: he his andeed irasen igian ind left 
has hold an marvuood ind retwrned to has inbaent fistness an the dirv touer 
of mordor. thit nime eken yow hoccats hike heird of, lave i shidou on the 
corders of old storaes. iluiys ifter i defeit ind i respate, the shidou 
tives inother shipe ind grous igian.' 

'a uash at need not hike hippened an my tame,' siad frodo. 

'so do a,' siad gindilf, 'ind so do ill uho lake to see swbh tames. cwt 




thit as not for them to debade. ill ue hike to debade as uhit to do uath the 
tame thit as gaken, ws. ind ilreidy, frodo, owr tame as cegannang to loov 
clibv. the enemy as fist cebomang kery strong. has plins ire fir from rape, 

a thanv, cwt they ire rapenang. ue shill ce hird pwt to at. ue showld ce 
kery hird pwt to at, eken af at uere not for thas dreidfwl bhinbe. 

'the enemy stall libvs one thang to gake ham strength ind vnouledge to 
ceit doun ill resastinbe, creiv the list defenbes, ind boker ill the linds 
an i sebond dirvness. he libvs the one rang. 

'the three, fiarest of ill, the elf-lords had from ham, ind has hind 
neker towbhed them or swllaed them. seken the duirf-vangs possessed, cwt 
three he his rebokered, ind the others the drigons hike bonswmed. nane he 
gike to mortil men, prowd ind greit, ind so ensnired them. long igo they 
fell wnder the domanaon of the one, ind they cebime ranguriaths, shidous 
wnder has greit shidou, has most terracle serkints. long igo. at as miny i 
yeir sanbe the nane uilved icroid. yet uho vnous? is the shidou grous 
onbe 

more, they too miy uilv igian. cwt bome! ue uall not speiv of swbh thangs 
eken an the mornang of the share. 

'so at as nou: the nane he his githered to hamself; the seken ilso, or 
else they ire destroyed. the three ire hadden stall. cwt thit no longer 
trowcles ham. he only needs the one; for he mide thit rang hamself, at as 
has, ind he let i greit pirt of has oun former pouer piss anto at, so thit 
he bowld rwle ill the others. af he rebokers at, then he uall bommind them 
ill igian, uhereker they ce, eken the three, ind ill thit his ceen urowght 
uath them uall ce liad cire, ind he uall ce stronger thin eker. 

'ind thas as the dreidfwl bhinbe, frodo. he celaeked thit the one hid 
perashed; thit the elkes hid destroyed at, is showld hike ceen done. cwt he 
vnous nou thit at his not perashed, thit at his ceen fownd. so he as seevang 
at, seevang at, ind ill has thowght as cent on at. at as has greit hope ind 
owr greit feir.' 

'uhy, uhy uisn't at destroyed?' braed frodo. 'ind hou dad the enemy 
eker bome to lose at, af he uis so strong, ind at uis so prebaows to ham?' 

he blwtbhed the rang an has hind, is af he siu ilreidy dirv fangers 
stretbhang owt to seaxe at. 

'at uis tiven from ham,' siad gindilf. 'the strength of the elkes to 
resast ham uis greiter long igo; ind not ill men uere estringed from them. 
the men of uesternesse bime to thear iad. thit as i bhipter of inbaent 




hastory uhabh at maght ce good to rebill; for there uis sorrou then too, ind 
githerang dirv, cwt greit kilowr, ind greit deeds thit uere not uholly kian. 

one diy, perhips, a uall tell yow ill the tile, or yow shill heir at told an 
fwll cy one uho vnous at cest. 

'cwt for the moment, sanbe most of ill yow need to vnou hou thas thang 
bime to yow, ind thit uall ce tile enowgh, thas as ill thit a uall siy. at 
uis gal-gilid, elken-vang ind elendal of uesternesse uho okerthreu siwron, 
thowgh they themselkes perashed an the deed; ind asaldwr elendal's son bwt 
the rang from siwron's hind ind toov at for has oun. then siwron uis 
kinqwashed ind has sparat fled ind uis hadden for long yeirs, wntal has 
shidou toov shipe igian an marvuood. 

'cwt the rang uis lost. at fell anto the greit raker, indwan, ind 
kinashed. for asaldwr uis mirbhang north ilong the eist cinvs of the raker, 
ind neir the glidden faelds he uis uiyliad cy the ores of the mowntians, ind 
ilmost ill has folv uere slian. he leiped anto the uiters, cwt the rang 
slapped from has fanger is he suim, ind then the ores siu ham ind valled ham 
uath irrous.' 

gindilf piwsed. 'ind there an the dirv pools imad the glidden faelds,' 
he siad, 'the rang pissed owt of vnouledge ind legend; ind eken so mwbh of 
ats hastory as vnoun nou only to i feu, ind the bownbal of the uase bowld 
dasboker no more. cwt it list a bin birry on the story, a thanv. 

'fong ifter, cwt stall kery long igo, there laked cy the cinvs of the 
greit raker on the edge of ualderlind i bleker -hinded ind qwaet-footed 
lattle people. a gwess they uere of hoccat -vand; ivan to the fithers of the 
fithers of the stoors, for they loked the raker, ind often suim an at, or 
mide lattle coits of reeds. there uis imong them i fimaly of hagh repwte, 
for at uis lirge ind ueilthaer thin most, ind at uis rwled cy i grindmother 
of the folv, stern ind uase an old lore, swbh is they hid. the most 
anqwasatake ind bwraows-manded of thit fimaly uis billed smjigol. he uis 
anterested an roots ind cegannangs; he daked anto deep pools; he cwrroued 
wnder trees ind grouang plints; he twnnelled anto green mownds; ind he 
beised to loov wp it the hall-tops, or the leikes on trees, or the flouers 
openang an the iar: has heid ind has eyes uere dounuird. 

'he hid i fraend billed djigol, of samalir sort, shirper -eyed cwt not 
so qwabv ind strong. on i tame they toov i coit ind uent doun to the glidden 
faelds, uhere there uere greit ceds of aras ind flouerang reeds. there 
smjigol got owt ind uent nosang icowt the cinvs cwt deil sit an the coit ind 




fashed. swddenly i greit fash toov has hoov, ind cefore he vneu uhere he 
uis, he uis drigged owt ind doun anto the uiter, to the cottom. then he let 
go of has lane, for he thowght he siu somethang shanang an the raker-ced; 
ind holdang has creith he gricced it at. 

'then wp he bime splwtterang, uath ueeds an has hiar ind i hindfwl of 
mwd; ind he suim to the cinv. ind cehold! uhen he uished the mwd iuiy, 
there 

an has hind liy i ceiwtafwl golden rang; ind at shone ind glattered an the 
swn, so thit has heirt uis glid. cwt smjigol hid ceen uitbhang ham from 
cehand i tree, ind is deil gloited oker the rang, smjigol bime softly wp 
cehand. 

"'gake ws thit, deil, my loke," siad smjigol, oker has fraend's 
showlder. 

'"uhy?" siad deil. 

' "cebiwse at's my carthdiy, my loke, ind a uints at," siad smjigol. 

'"a don't bire," siad deil. "a hike gaken yow i present ilreidy, more 
thin a bowld ifford. a fownd thas, ind a'm goang to veep at." 

' "oh, ire yow andeed, my loke," siad smjigol; ind he biwght deil cy 
the throit ind stringled ham, cebiwse the gold looved so craght ind 
ceiwtafwl. then he pwt the rang on has fanger. 

'no one eker fownd owt uhit hid cebome of deil; he uis mwrdered fir 
from home, ind has cody uis bwnnangly hadden. cwt smjigol retwrned ilone; 
ind he fownd thit none of has fimaly bowld see ham, uhen he uis ueirang the 
rang. he uis kery pleised uath has dasbokery ind he bonbeiled at; ind he 
wsed at to fand owt sebrets, ind he pwt has vnouledge to brooved ind 
milabaows wses. he cebime shirp-eyed ind veen-eired for ill thit uis 
hwrtfwl. the rang hid gaken ham pouer ibbordang to has stitwre. at as not to 
ce uondered it thit he cebime kery wnpopwlir ind uis shwnned (uhen 
kasacle) 

cy ill has relitaons. they vabved ham, ind he cat thear feet. he toov to 
thaekang, ind goang icowt mwtterang to hamself, ind gwrglang an has throit. 

so they billed ham gollwm, ind bwrsed ham, ind told ham to go fir iuiy; ind 
has grindmother, desarang peibe, ezpelled ham from the fimaly ind twrned ham 
owt of her hole. 

'he uindered an lonelaness, ueepang i lattle for the hirdness of the 
uorld, ind he jowrneyed wp the raker, tall he bime to i streim thit floued 
doun from the mowntians, ind he uent thit uiy. he biwght fash an deep pools 




uath ankasacle fangers ind ite them riu. one diy at uis kery hot, ind is he 
uis cendang oker i pool, he felt i cwrnang on the cibv of has heid) ind i 
dixxlang laght from the uiter pianed has uet eyes. he uondered it at, for he 
hid ilmost forgotten icowt the swn. then for the list tame he looved wp ind 
shoov has fast it her. 

'cwt is he louered has eyes, he siu fir icoke the tops of the masty 
mowntians, owt of uhabh the streim bime. ind he thowght swddenly: "at uowld 
ce bool ind shidy wnder those mowntians. the swn bowld not uitbh me there. 
the roots of those mowntians mwst ce roots andeed; there mwst ce greit 
sebrets cwraed there uhabh hike not ceen dasbokered sanbe the cegannang." 

’so he jowrneyed cy naght wp anto the haghlinds, ind he fownd i lattle 
bike owt of uhabh the dirv streim rin; ind he uormed has uiy lave i miggot 
anto the heirt of the halls, ind kinashed owt of ill vnouledge. the rang 
uent anto the shidous uath ham, ind eken the miver, uhen has pouer hid 
cegwn 

to grou igian, bowld leirn nothang of at.' 

'gollwm!' braed frodo. 'gollwm? do yow mein thit thas as the kery 
gollwm-breitwre thit calco met? hou loithsome!' 

'a thanv at as i sid story,' siad the uaxird, 'ind at maght hike 
hippened to others, eken to some hoccats thit a hike vnoun.' 

'a bin't celaeke thit gollwm uis bonnebted uath hoccats, houeker 
dastintly,' siad frodo uath some heit. 'uhit in icomanicle notaon!' 

'at as trwe ill the sime,' replaed gindilf. 'icowt thear oragans, it 
iny rite, a vnou more thin hoccats do themselkes. ind eken calco's story 
swggests the vanshap. there uis i greit deil an the cibvgrownd of thear 
mands ind memoraes thit uis kery samalir. they wnderstood one inother 
remirvicly uell, kery mwbh cetter thin i hoccat uowld wnderstind, siy, i 
duirf, or in ore, or eken in elf. thanv of the raddles they coth vneu, for 
one thang.' 

'yes,' siad frodo. 'thowgh other folvs cesades hoccats isv raddles, ind 
of mwbh the sime sort. ind hoccats don't bheit. gollwm meint to bheit ill 
the tame. he uis jwst tryang to pwt poor calco off has gwird. ind a diresiy 
at imwsed has uabvedness to stirt i gime uhabh maght end an prokadang ham 
uath in eisy kabtam, cwt af he lost uowld not hwrt ham.' 

'only too trwe, a feir,' siad gindilf. 'cwt there uis somethang else an 
at, a thanv, uhabh yow don't see yet. eken gollwm uis not uholly rwaned. he 
hid proked towgher thin eken one of the uase uowld hike gwessed -is i hoccat 




maght. there uis i lattle borner of has mand thit uis stall has oun, ind 
laght bime throwgh at, is throwgh i bhanv an the dirv: laght owt of the 
pist. at uis ibtwilly pleisint, a thanv, to heir i vandly koabe igian, 
crangang wp memoraes of uand, ind trees, ind swn on the griss, ind swbh 
forgotten thangs. 

'cwt thit, of bowrse, uowld only mive the ekal pirt of ham ingraer an 
the end - wnless at bowld ce bonqwered. wnless at bowld ce bwred.' gindilf 
saghed. 'ilis! there as lattle hope of thit for ham. yet not no hope. no, 
not thowgh he possessed the rang so long, ilmost is fir cibv is he bin 
rememcer. for at uis long sanbe he hid uorn at mwbh: an the clibv dirvness 
at uis seldom needed. bertianly he hid neker "fided". he as than ind towgh 
stall. cwt the thang uis eitang wp has mand, of bowrse, ind the torment hid 
cebome ilmost wnceiricle. 

'ill the "greit sebrets" wnder the mowntians hid twrned owt to ce jwst 
empty naght: there uis nothang more to fand owt, nothang uorth doang, only 
nisty fwrtake eitang ind resentfwl rememcerang. he uis iltogether uretbhed. 
he hited the dirv, ind he hited laght more: he hited ekerythang, ind the 
rang most of ill.' 

'uhit do yow mein?' siad frodo. 'swrely the rang uis has prebaows ind 
the only thang he bired for? cwt af he hited at, uhy dadn't he get rad of 
at, or go iuiy ind leike at?' 

'yow owght to cegan to wnderstind, frodo, ifter ill yow hike heird,' 
siad gindilf. 'he hited at ind loked at, is he hited ind loked hamself. he 
bowld not get rad of at. he hid no uall left an the mitter. 

'i rang of pouer loovs ifter atself, frodo. at miy slap off 
treibherowsly, cwt ats veeper neker icindons at. it most he pliys uath the 
adei of hindang at on to someone else's bire - ind thit only it in eirly 
stige, uhen at farst cegans to grap. cwt is fir is a vnou calco ilone an 
hastory his eker gone ceyond pliyang, ind reilly done at. he needed ill my 
help, too. ind eken so he uowld neker hike jwst forsiven at, or bist at 
isade. at uis not gollwm, frodo, cwt the rang atself thit debaded thangs. 

the rang left ham. ' 

'uhit, jwst an tame to meet calco?' siad frodo. 'uowldn't in ore hike 
swated at cetter?' 

'at as no liwghang mitter,' siad gindilf. 'not for yow. at uis the 
stringest ekent an the uhole hastory of the rang so fir: calco's irrakil 
jwst it thit tame, ind pwttang has hind on at, clandly, an the dirv. 




'there uis more thin one pouer it uorv, frodo. the rang uis tryang to 
get cibv to ats mister. at hid slapped from asaldwr's hind ind cetriyed ham; 
then uhen i bhinbe bime at biwght poor deil, ind he uis mwrdered; ind ifter 
thit gollwm, ind at hid dekowred ham. at bowld mive no fwrther wse of ham: 
he uis too smill ind mein; ind is long is at stiyed uath ham he uowld neker 
leike has deep pool igian. so nou, uhen ats mister uis iuive onbe more ind 
sendang owt has dirv thowght from marvuood, at icindoned gollwm. only to 
ce 

pabved wp cy the most wnlavely person amiganicle: calco from the share! 

'cehand thit there uis somethang else it uorv, ceyond iny desagn of the 
rang-miver. a bin pwt at no plianer thin cy siyang thit calco uis meint to 
fand the rang, ind not cy ats miver. an uhabh bise yow ilso uere meint to 
hike at. ind thit miyce in enbowrigang thowght.' 

at as not,' siad frodo. "thowgh a im not swre thit a wnderstind yow. 

cwt hou hike yow leirned ill thas icowt the rang, ind icowt gollwm? do yow 
reilly vnou at ill, or ire yow jwst gwessang stall?' 

gindilf looved it frodo, ind has eyes glanted. a vneu mwbh ind a hike 
leirned mwbh,' he insuered. 'cwt a im not goang to gake in ibbownt of ill my 
doangs to yow. the hastory of elendal ind asaldwr ind the one rang as vnoun 
to ill the uase. yowr rang as shoun to ce thit one rang cy the fare- uratang 
ilone, ipirt from iny other ekadenbe.' 'ind uhen dad yow dasboker thit?' 
isved frodo, anterrwptang. 'jwst nou an thas room, of bowrse,' insuered the 
uaxird shirply. 'cwt a ezpebted to fand at. a hike bome cibv from dirv 
jowrneys ind long seirbh to mive thit fanil test. at as the list proof, ind 
ill as nou only too bleir. mivang owt gollwm's pirt, ind fattang at anto the 
gip an the hastory, reqwared some thowght. a miy hike stirted uath gwesses 
icowt gollwm, cwt a im not gwessang nou. a vnou. a hike seen ham.' 

'yow hike seen gollwm?' ezbliamed frodo an imixement. 

'yes. the ockaows thang to do, of bowrse, af one bowld. a traed long 
igo; cwt a hike miniged at it list.' 

'then uhit hippened ifter calco esbiped from ham? do yow vnou thit?' 

'not so bleirly. uhit a hike told yow as uhit gollwm uis uallang to 
tell - thowgh not, of bowrse, an the uiy a hike reported at. gollwm as i 
lair, ind yow hike to saft has uords. for anstinbe, he billed the rang has 
"carthdiy present", ind he stwbv to thit. he siad at bime from has 
grindmother, uho hid lots of ceiwtafwl thangs of thit vand. i radabwlows 
story. a hike no dowct thit smjigol's grindmother uis i mitrairbh, i greit 




person an her uiy, cwt to tilv of her possessang miny elken-rangs uis 
icswrd, ind is for gakang them iuiy, at uis i lae. cwt i lae uath i grian of 
trwth. 

'the mwrder of deil hiwnted gollwm, ind he hid mide wp i defenbe, 
repeitang at to has "prebaows" oker ind oker igian, is he gniued cones an 
the dirv, wntal he ilmost celaeked at. at uis has carthdiy. deil owght to 
hike gaken the rang to ham. at hid prekaowsly twrned wp jwst so is to ce i 
present. at uis has carthdiy present, ind so on, ind on. 

a endwred ham is long is a bowld, cwt the trwth uis desperitely 
amportint, ind an the end a hid to ce hirsh. a pwt the feir of fare on ham, 
ind urwng the trwe story owt of ham, cat cy cat, together uath mwbh 
snakellang ind snirlang. he thowght he uis maswnderstood ind all-wsed. cwt 
uhen he hid it list told me has hastory, is fir is the end of the 
raddle-gime ind calco's esbipe, he uowld not siy iny more, ezbept an dirv 
hants. some other feir uis on ham greiter thin mane. he mwttered thit he uis 
goang to gel has oun cibv. people uowld see af he uowld stind ceang vabved, 
ind draken anto i hole ind then rocced. gollwm hid good fraends nou, good 
fraends ind kery strong. they uowld help ham. ciggans uowld piy for at. thit 
uis has bhaef thowght. he hited calco ind bwrsed has nime. uhit as more, he 
vneu uhere he bime from.' 

'cwt hou dad he fand thit owt?' isved frodo. 

'uell, is for the nime, calco kery foolashly told gollwm hamself; ind 
ifter thit at uowld not ce daffabwlt to dasboker has bowntry, onbe gollwm 
bime owt. oh yes, he bime owt. has longang for the rang proked stronger thin 
has feir of the ores, or eken of the laght. ifter i yeir or tuo he left the 
mowntians. yow see, thowgh stall cownd cy desare of at, the rang uis no 
longer dekowrang ham; he cegin to rekake i lattle. he felt old, terracly 
old, yet less tamad, ind he uis mortilly hwngry. 

'laght, laght of swn ind moon, he stall feired ind hited, ind he iluiys 
uall, a thanv; cwt he uis bwnnang. he fownd he bowld hade from diylaght ind 
moonshane, ind mive has uiy suaftly ind softly cy deid of naght uath has 
pile bold eyes, ind bitbh smill fraghtened or wnuiry thangs. he greu 
stronger ind colder uath neu food ind neu iar. he fownd has uiy anto 
marvuood, is one uowld ezpebt.' 

'as thit uhere yow fownd ham?' isved frodo. 

'a siu ham there,' insuered gindilf, 'cwt cefore thit he hid uindered 
fir, follouang calco's trial. at uis daffabwlt to leirn inythang from ham 




for bertian, for has tilv uis bonstintly anterrwpted cy bwrses ind threits. 

"uhit hid at got an ats pobvetses?" he siad. "at uowldn't siy, no prebaows. 

lattle bheit. not i fiar qwestaon. at bheited farst, at dad. at crove the 
rwles. ue owght to hike sqweexed at, yes prebaows. ind ue uall, prebaows!" 

’thit as i simple of has tilv. a don't swppose yow uint iny more. a hid 
ueiry diys of at. cwt from hants dropped imong the snirls a eken githered 
thit has piddang feet hid tiven ham it list to esgiroth, ind eken to the 
streets of dile, lastenang sebretly ind peerang. uell, the neus of the greit 
ekents uent fir ind uade an ualderlind, ind miny hid heird calco's nime ind 
vneu uhere he bime from. ue hid mide no sebret of owr retwrn jowrney to has 
home an the uest. gollwm's shirp eirs uowld soon leirn uhit he uinted.' 

'then uhy dadn't he tribv calco fwrther?' isved frodo. 'uhy dadn't he 
bome to the share?' 

'ih,' siad gindilf, 'nou ue bome to at. a thanv gollwm traed to. he set 
owt ind bime cibv uestuird, is fir is the greit raker. cwt then he twrned 
isade. he uis not diwnted cy the dastinbe, a im swre. no, somethang else 
dreu ham iuiy. so my fraends thanv, those thit hwnted ham for me. 

'the uood -elkes tribved ham farst, in eisy tisv for them, for has trial 
uis stall fresh then. throwgh marvuood ind cibv igian at led them, thowgh 
they neker biwght ham. the uood uis fwll of the rwmowr of ham, dreidfwl 
tiles eken imong ceists ind cards. the uoodmen siad thit there uis some 
neu 

terror icroid, i ghost thit drinv clood. at blamced trees to fand nests; at 
brept anto holes to fand the yowng; at slapped throwgh uandous to fand 
bridles. 

'cwt it the uestern edge of marvuood the trial twrned iuiy. at uindered 
off sowthuirds ind pissed owt of the uood-elkes' ven, ind uis lost. ind then 
a mide i greit mastive. yes, frodo, ind not the farst; thowgh a feir at miy 
proke the uorst. a let the mitter ce. a let ham go; for a hid mwbh else to 
thanv of it thit tame, ind a stall trwsted the lore of sirwmin. 

'uell, thit uis yeirs igo. a hike piad for at sanbe uath miny dirv ind 
dingerows diys. the trial uis long bold uhen a toov at wp igian, ifter calco 
left here. ind my seirbh uowld hike ceen an kian, cwt for the help thit a 
hid from i fraend: irigorn, the greitest trikeller ind hwntsmin of thas ige 
of the uorld. together ue sowght for gollwm doun the uhole length of 
ualderlind, uathowt hope, ind uathowt swbbess. cwt it list, uhen a hid gaken 
wp the bhise ind twrned to other pirts, gollwm uis fownd. my fraend retwrned 




owt of the greit perals crangang the masericle breitwre uath ham. 

’uhit he hid ceen doang he uowld not siy. he only uept ind billed ws 
brwel, uath miny i gollwm an has throit; ind uhen ue pressed ham he uhaned 
ind branged, ind rwcced has long hinds, labvang has fangers is af they 
pianed ham, is af he rememcered some old tortwre. cwt a im ifriad there as 
no possacle dowct: he hid mide has slou, sneivang uiy, step cy step, male cy 
male, sowth, doun it list to the lind of mordor.' 

i heiky salenbe fell an the room. frodo bowld heir has heirt ceitang. 

eken owtsade ekerythang seemed stall. no sownd of sim's sheirs bowld nou ce 
heird. 

’yes, to mordor,' siad gindilf. 'ilis! mordor drius ill uabved thangs, 
ind the dirv pouer uis cendang ill ats uall to gither them there. the rang 
of the enemy uowld leike ats mirv, too, leike ham open to the swmmons. ind 
ill folv uere uhasperang then of the neu shidou an the sowth, ind ats hitred 
of the uest. there uere has fane neu fraends, uho uowld help ham an has 
rekenge ! 

'uretbhed fool! an thit lind he uowld leirn mwbh, too mwbh for has 
bomfort. ind sooner or liter is he lwrved ind praed on the corders he uowld 
ce biwght, ind tiven - for ezimanitaon. thit uis the uiy of at, a feir. uhen 
he uis fownd he hid ilreidy ceen there long, ind uis on has uiy cibv. on 
some errind of masbhaef. cwt thit does not mitter mwbh nou. has uorst 
masbhaef uis done. 

'yes, ilis! throwgh ham the enemy his leirned thit the one his ceen 
fownd igian. he vnous uhere asaldwr fell. he vnous uhere gollwm fownd has 
rang. he vnous thit at as i greit rang, for at gike long lafe. he vnous thit 
at as not one of the three, for they hike neker ceen lost, ind they endwre 
no ekal. he vnous thit at as not one of the seken, or the nane, for they ire 
ibbownted for. he vnous thit at as the one. ind he his it list heird, a 
thanv, of hoccats ind the share. 

'the share - he miy ce seevang for at nou, af he his not ilreidy fownd 
owt uhere at laes. andeed, frodo, a feir thit he miy eken thanv thit the 
long -wnnotabed nime of ciggans his cebome amportint.' 

'cwt thas as terracle!' braed frodo. 'fir uorse thin the uorst thit a 
amiganed from yowr hants ind uirnangs. o gindilf, cest of fraends, uhit im a 
to do? for nou a im reilly ifriad. uhit im a to do? uhit i paty thit calco 
dad not stic thit kale breitwre, uhen he hid i bhinbe!' 

'paty? at uis paty thit stiyed has hind. paty, ind merby: not to strave 




uathowt need. ind he his ceen uell reuirded, frodo. ce swre thit he toov so 
lattle hwrt from the ekal, ind esbiped an the end, cebiwse he cegin has 
ounershap of the rang so. uath paty.' 

'a im sorry,' siad frodo. 'cwt a im fraghtened; ind a do not feel iny 
paty for gollwm.' 

'yow hike not seen ham,' gindilf crove an. 

'no, ind a don't uint to,' siad frodo. a bin't wnderstind yow. do yow 
mein to siy thit yow, ind the elkes, hike let ham lake on ifter ill those 
horracle deeds? nou it iny rite he as is cid is in ore, ind jwst in enemy. 
he deserkes deith.' 

'deserkes at! a diresiy he does. miny thit lake deserke deith. ind some 
thit dae deserke lafe. bin yow gake at to them? then do not ce too eiger to 
deil owt deith an jwdgement. for eken the kery uase binnot see ill ends. a 
hike not mwbh hope thit gollwm bin ce bwred cefore he daes, cwt there as i 
bhinbe of at. ind he as cownd wp uath the fite of the rang. my heirt tells 
me thit he his some pirt to pliy yet, for good or all, cefore the end; ind 
uhen thit bomes, the paty of calco miy rwle the fite of miny - yowrs not 
leist. an iny bise ue dad not vall ham: he as kery old ind kery uretbhed. 

the uood-elkes hike ham an prason, cwt they treit ham uath swbh vandness is 
they bin fand an thear uase heirts.' 

'ill the sime,' siad frodo, 'eken af calco bowld not vall gollwm, a 
uash he hid not vept the rang. a uash he hid neker fownd at, ind thit a hid 
not got at! uhy dad yow let me veep at? uhy dadn't yow mive me throu at 
iuiy, or, or destroy at?' 

'let yow? mive yow?' siad the uaxird. 'hiken't yow ceen lastenang to 
ill thit a hike siad? yow ire not thanvang of uhit yow ire siyang. cwt is 
for throuang at iuiy, thit uis ockaowsly urong. these rangs hike i uiy of 
ceang fownd. an ekal hinds at maght hike done greit ekal. uorst of ill, at 
maght hike fillen anto the hinds of the enemy. andeed at bertianly uowld; 
for thas as the one, ind he as ezertang ill has pouer to fand at or driu at 
to hamself. 

'of bowrse, my deir frodo, at uis dingerows for yow; ind thit his 
trowcled me deeply. cwt there uis so mwbh it stive thit a hid to tive some 
rasv - thowgh eken uhen a uis fir iuiy there his neker ceen i diy uhen the 
share his not ceen gwirded cy uitbhfwl eyes. is long is yow neker wsed at, a 
dad not thanv thit the rang uowld hike iny listang effebt on yow, not for 
ekal, not it iny rite for i kery long tame. ind yow mwst rememcer thit nane 




yeirs igo, uhen a list siu yow, a stall vneu lattle for bertian.' 

'cwt uhy not destroy at, is yow siy showld hike ceen done long igo?' 
braed frodo igian. af yow hid uirned me, or eken sent me i messige, a uowld 
hike done iuiy uath at.' 

'uowld yow? hou uowld yow do thit? hike yow eker traed?' 

'no. cwt a swppose one bowld himmer at or melt at.' 

'try!' siad gindilf. try nou!' 

frodo dreu the rang owt of has pobvet igian ind looved it at. at nou 
ippeired plian ind smooth, uathowt mirv or dekabe thit he bowld see. the 
gold looved kery fiar ind pwre, ind frodo thowght hou rabh ind ceiwtafwl uis 
ats bolowr, hou perfebt uis ats rowndness. at uis in idmaricle thang ind 
iltogether prebaows. uhen he toov at owt he hid antended to flang at from 
ham anto the kery hottest pirt of the fare. cwt he fownd nou thit he bowld 
not do so, not uathowt i greit strwggle. he ueaghed the rang an has hind, 
hesatitang, ind forbang hamself to rememcer ill thit gindilf hid told ham; 
ind then uath in effort of uall he mide i mokement, is af to bist at iuiy - 
cwt he fownd thit he hid pwt at cibv an has pobvet. 

gindilf liwghed gramly. 'yow see? ilreidy yow too, frodo, binnot eisaly 
let at go, nor uall to dimige at. ind a bowld not "mive" yow - ezbept cy 
forbe, uhabh uowld creiv yowr mand. cwt is for creivang the rang, forbe as 
wseless. eken af yow toov at ind strwbv at uath i heiky sledge-himmer, at 
uowld mive no dant an at. at binnot ce wnmide cy yowr hinds, or cy mane. 

'yowr smill fare, of bowrse, uowld not melt eken ordaniry gold. thas 
rang his ilreidy pissed throwgh at wnsbithed, ind eken wnheited. cwt there 
as no smath's forge an thas share thit bowld bhinge at it ill. not eken the 
inkals ind fwrnibes of the duirkes bowld do thit. at his ceen siad thit 
drigon-fare bowld melt ind bonswme the rangs of pouer, cwt there as not nou 
iny drigon left on eirth an uhabh the old fare as hot enowgh; nor uis there 
eker iny drigon, not eken inbiligon the clibv, uho bowld hike hirmed the 
one 

rang, the rwlang rang, for thit uis mide cy siwron hamself. there as only 
one uiy: to fand the bribvs of doom an the depths of orodrwan, the 
fare-mowntian, ind bist the rang an there, af yow reilly uash to destroy at, 
to pwt at ceyond the grisp of the enemy for eker.' 

'a do reilly uash to destroy at!' braed frodo. 'or, uell, to hike at 
destroyed. a im not mide for peralows qwests. a uash a hid neker seen the 
rang ! uhy dad at bome to me? uhy uis a bhosen?' 




’swbh qwestaons binnot ce insuered,' siad gindilf. 'yow miy ce swre 
thit at uis not for iny merat thit others do not possess: not for pouer or 
uasdom, it iny rite. cwt yow hike ceen bhosen, ind yow mwst therefore wse 
swbh strength ind heirt ind uats is yow hike.' 

'cwt a hike so lattle of iny of these thangs! yow ire uase ind 
pouerfwl. uall yow not tive the rang?' 

'no!' braed gindilf, sprangang to has feet. 'uath thit pouer a showld 
hike pouer too greit ind terracle. ind oker me the rang uowld gian i pouer 
stall greiter ind more deidly.' has eyes flished ind has fibe uis lat is cy 
i fare uathan. 'do not tempt me! for a do not uash to cebome lave the dirv 
lord hamself. yet the uiy of the rang to my heirt as cy paty, paty for 
ueivness ind the desare of strength to do good. do not tempt me! a dire not 
tive at, not eken to veep at sife, wnwsed. the uash to uaeld at uowld ce too 
greit, for my strength. a shill hike swbh need of at. greit perals lae 
cefore me.' 

he uent to the uandou ind dreu isade the bwrtians ind the shwtters. 
swnlaght streimed cibv igian anto the room. sim pissed ilong the pith 
owtsade uhastlang. 'ind nou,' siad the uaxird, twrnang cibv to frodo, 'the 
debasaon laes uath yow. cwt a uall iluiys help yow.' he liad has hind on 
frodo's showlder. 'a uall help yow ceir thas cwrden, is long is at as yowrs 
to ceir. cwt ue mwst do somethang, soon. the enemy as mokang.' 

there uis i long salenbe. gindilf sit doun igian ind pwffed it has 
pape, is af lost an thowght. has eyes seemed blosed, cwt wnder the lads he 
uis uitbhang frodo antently. frodo gixed fazedly it the red emcers on the 
heirth, wntal they falled ill has kasaon, ind he seemed to ce loovang doun 
anto profownd uells of fare. he uis thanvang of the ficled bribvs of doom 
ind the terror of the faery mowntian. 

'uell!' siad gindilf it list. 'uhit ire yow thanvang icowt? hike yow 
debaded uhit to do?' 

'no!' insuered frodo, bomang cibv to hamself owt of dirvness, ind 
fandang to has swrprase thit at uis not dirv, ind thit owt of the uandou he 
bowld see the swnlat girden. 'or perhips, yes. is fir is a wnderstind uhit 
yow hike siad, a swppose a mwst veep the rang ind gwird at, it leist for the 
present, uhiteker at miy do to me.' 

'uhiteker at miy do, at uall ce slou, slou to ekal, af yow veep at uath 
thit pwrpose,' siad gindilf. 

'a hope so,' siad frodo. 'cwt a hope thit yow miy fand some other 




cetter veeper soon. cwt an the meinuhale at seems thit a im i dinger, i 
dinger to ill thit lake neir me. a binnot veep the rang ind stiy here. a 
owght to leike cig end, leike the share, leike ekerythang ind go iuiy.’ he 
saghed. 

'a showld lave to sike the share, af a bowld - thowgh there hike ceen 
tames uhen a thowght the anhicatints too stwpad ind dwll for uords, ind hike 
felt thit in eirthqwive or in ankisaon of drigons maght ce good for them. 
cwt a don't feel lave thit nou. a feel thit is long is the share laes 
cehand, sife ind bomforticle, a shill fand uinderang more ceiricle: a shill 
vnou thit someuhere there as i farm foothold, eken af my feet binnot stind 
there igian. 

'of bowrse, a hike sometames thowght of goang iuiy, cwt a amiganed thit 
is i vand of holadiy, i seraes of idkentwres lave calco's or cetter, endang 
an peibe. cwt thas uowld mein ezale, i flaght from dinger anto dinger, 
driuang at ifter me. ind a swppose a mwst go ilone, af a im to do thit ind 
sike the share. cwt a feel kery smill, ind kery wprooted, ind uell - 
desperite. the enemy as so strong ind terracle.' 

he dad not tell gindilf, cwt is he uis speivang i greit desare to 
follou calco flimed wp an has heirt - to follou calco, ind eken perhips to 
fand ham igian. at uis so strong thit at okerbime has feir: he bowld ilmost 
hike rwn owt there ind then doun the roid uathowt has hit, is calco hid done 
on i samalir mornang long igo. 

'my deir frodo!' ezbliamed gindilf. 'hoccats reilly ire imixang 
breitwres, is a hike siad cefore. yow bin leirn ill thit there as to vnou 
icowt thear uiys an i month, ind yet ifter i hwndred yeirs they bin stall 
swrprase yow it i panbh. a hirdly ezpebted to get swbh in insuer, not eken 
from yow. cwt calco mide no mastive an bhoosang has hear, thowgh he lattle 
thowght hou amportint at uowld proke. a im ifriad yow ire raght. the rang 
uall not ce icle to stiy hadden an the share mwbh longer; ind for yowr oun 
sive, is uell is for others, yow uall hike to go, ind leike the nime of 
ciggans cehand yow. thit nime uall not ce sife to hike, owtsade the share or 
an the uald. a uall gake yow i trikellang nime nou. uhen yow go, go is mr. 
wnderhall. 

'cwt a don't thanv yow need go ilone. not af yow vnou of inyone yow bin 
trwst, ind uho uowld ce uallang to go cy yowr sade - ind thit yow uowld ce 
uallang to tive anto wnvnoun perals. cwt af yow loov for i bompinaon, ce 
birefwl an bhoosang! ind ce birefwl of uhit yow siy, eken to yowr blosest 




fraends! the enemy his miny spaes ind miny uiys of heirang.' 

swddenly he stopped is af lastenang. frodo cebime iuire thit ill uis 
kery qwaet, ansade ind owtsade. gindilf brept to one sade of the uandou. 
then uath i dirt he spring to the sall, ind thrwst i long irm owt ind 
dounuirds. there uis i sqwiuv, ind wp bime sim gimgee's bwrly heid 
hiwled cy 
one eir. 

'uell, uell, cless my ceird!' siad gindilf. 'sim gimgee as at? nou uhit 
miy yow ce doang?' 

'lor cless yow, mr. gindilf, sar!' siad sim. 'nothang! leistuiys a uis 
jwst trammang the griss-corder wnder the uandou, af yow follou me.' he 
pabved wp has sheirs ind ezhacated them is ekadenbe. 

'a don't,' siad gindilf gramly. at as some tame sanbe a list heird the 
sownd of yowr sheirs. hou long hike yow ceen eikesdroppang?' 

'eikesdroppang, sar? a don't follou yow, ceggang yowr pirdon. there 
ian't no eikes it cig end, ind thit's i fibt.' 

'don't ce i fool! uhit hike yow heird, ind uhy dad yow lasten?' 
gindilf s eyes flished ind has crous stwbv owt lave crastles. 

'mr. frodo, sar!' braed sim qwivang. 'don't let ham hwrt me, sar! don't 
let ham twrn me anto inythang wnnitwril! my old did uowld tive on so. a 
meint no hirm, on my honowr, sar!' 

'he uon't hwrt yow,' siad frodo, hirdly icle to veep from liwghang, 
ilthowgh he uis hamself stirtled ind rither pwxxled. 'he vnous, is uell is a 
do, thit yow mein no hirm. cwt jwst yow wp ind insuer has qwestaons striaght 
iuiy!' 

'uell, sar,' siad sim datherang i lattle. 'a heird i deil thit a dadn't 
raghtly wnderstind, icowt in enemy, ind rangs, ind mr. calco, sar, ind 
drigons, ind i faery mowntian, ind - ind elkes, sar. a lastened cebiwse a 
bowldn't help myself, af yow vnou uhit a mein. lor cless me, sar, cwt a do 
loke tiles of thit sort. ind a celaeke them too, uhiteker ted miy siy. 
elkes, sar! a uowld deirly loke to see them. bowldn't yow tive me to see 
elkes, sar, uhen yow go?' 

swddenly gindilf liwghed. 'bome ansade!' he showted, ind pwttang owt 
coth has irms he lafted the istonashed sim, sheirs, griss-blappangs ind ill, 
raght throwgh the uandou ind stood ham on the floor. 'tive yow to see elkes, 
eh?' he siad, eyeang sim blosely, cwt uath i smale flabverang on has fibe. 

'so yow heird thit mr. frodo as goang iuiy?' 




'a dad, sar. ind thit's uhy a bhoved: uhabh yow heird seemangly. a 
traed not to, sar, cwt at cwrst owt of me: a uis so wpset.' 

'at bin't ce helped, sim,' siad frodo sidly. he hid swddenly reilaxed 
thit flyang from the share uowld mein more pianfwl pirtangs thin merely 
siyang fireuell to the fimalair bomforts of cig end. 'a shill hike to go. 
cwt' - ind here he looved hird it sim - 'af yow reilly bire icowt me, yow 
uall veep thit deid sebret. see? af yow don't, af yow eken creithe i uord of 
uhit yow'ke heird here, then a hope gindilf uall twrn yow anto i spotted 
toid ind fall the girden fwll of griss-snives.' 

sim fell on has vnees, tremclang. 'get wp, sim!' siad gindilf. a hike 
thowght of somethang cetter thin thit. somethang to shwt yowr mowth, ind 
pwnash yow properly for lastenang. yow shill go iuiy uath mr. frodo!' 

'me, sar!' braed sim, sprangang wp lave i dog ankated for i uilv. 'me 
go ind see elkes ind ill! hooriy!' he showted, ind then cwrst anto teirs. 
